ooden sculpture has appeared
alongside stone sculpture
throughout Egyptian history,
from prehistory down to Ptolemaic and
Roman times. Although the vulnerability of
wood to moisture and other threats, including
termites—something the ancient Egyptians
were clearly aware of—has often obscured
this fact, fortunately enough survives to allow
us to state for certain that wooden sculpture
was always an important aspect of funerary
and ritual practices. Wooden sculpture in this
context has been taken to mean wooden
statues of the king and queen and those of the
tomb owner and his or her family. This means
that certain categories with perhaps a claim to
the designation sculpture have been excluded.
These include cosmetic implements (e.g.,
mirror handles, unguent pots, cosmetic
spoons, etc.), statues of prisoners, tomb
models (with the exception of the
extraordinarily elaborate female offering
bearers from the early Middle Kingdom), harp
finials, shabtis, statues of gods, and other ritual
objects.
Construction
Wooden sculpture throughout Pharaonic
history was mainly made of native timber—
acacia, sycamore, and tamarisk, and
sometimes a combination of these. For
example, a statue of acacia may have a base
made of tamarisk. The fibrous and knotty
character of the native woods meant that
statues larger than 300 - 400 mm had to be
made from several separate pieces joined by
dowels and mortise and tenon joints (fig. 1).
The joints were subsequently concealed by a
layer of paint or painted plaster on which the
details of costume and jewelry were added. It
is unfortunate that it is this painted layer that
has often suffered the most damage (fig. 2).
Imported woods like ebony and cedar were
also occasionally used. In the New Kingdom,
imported woods were favored for the
production of royal statues in wood, and
proportionally more private statuary was made
of ebony. We should bear in mind, however,
that as yet relatively few statues have had their
W
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 2
Figure 1. Statue of Ka-aper. 1.12 m. CG 34.
wood scientifically analyzed, so all conclusions
are tentative.
Workshops
Ancient Egyptian artisans were highly skilled
at carving wood, and illustrations of
workshop scenes often include statue-making
(fig. 3). Although the inscriptions
accompanying these scenes rarely refer to the
statues depicted, the tools shown are a good
indication of the material in question; an adze
in the hand of a workman is an indication that
the material is wood, whereas hammers and
mallets tend to be limited to working stone.
An adze, of course, would be quickly blunted
if used on stone, and a mallet would be far
too crude an instrument to work wood. The
statues are usually shown in a completed state,
regardless of the type of tool action. What is
also revealed is that the artisans worked as a
Figure 2. Statue of Metjetji. 0.89 m. The Brooklyn
Museum 50.77.
team rather than as individual artists; many
individuals were involved in the production of
a single statue.
Unfortunately, not enough wooden statues
survive to establish whether there were local
fashions centered around a particular town or
necropolis. We can surmise a major Old
Kingdom workshop in or around Memphis
producing for the necropolis of Saqqara, and
in the First Intermediate Period and the
Middle Kingdom there were centers at Assiut,
Meir, and Beni Hassan. Few conclusions can
be drawn from this, however, beyond
remarking that the wooden statues from Beni
Hassan tend to have extremely large, painted
eyes. During the New Kingdom and later, the
main workshops were in Thebes and
Memphis, and it will come as no surprise that
most provenanced statues from these periods
come from these two locations.
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 3
Figure 3. Workshop scene of statue-making in the
Tomb of Ti.
Old Kingdom
Wooden statues in the Old Kingdom may
have been considered necessary to depict the
tomb owner in his more active roles,
accompanied by his wife. Stone statues in the
tomb are usually static groups or seated
statues, whereas those of wood usually show
the tomb owner striding with staff and scepter
in his left and right hand, respectively. These
two aspects, active and passive, are matched
by the depictions on Old Kingdom tomb
walls. The statues, both wood and stone, first
appear in the superstructure of the tombs,
then in specially designed serdabs, and towards
the end of the period in the burial chambers
as well. As we move on in time, the quantity
of wooden statues in each tomb increases
while the size and quality decrease. In all, over
250 statues survive from this period.
No royal statues have survived from the Old
Kingdom—in fact, only the front part of a
foot of a royal statue in wood has survived to
prove that they existed at this time; certainly
not enough to be able to draw any
conclusions on type or prevalence.
Costumes and Wigs
Male statues in the Old Kingdom show a wide
variety of costume and wig types, but
unfortunately no combination of these can be
linked to a specific role or title (fig. 4). This is
undoubtedly due to the fact that the plaster
layer with the subtle details of decoration has
usually not survived the test of time. Female
statues are nearly always standing or with the
left foot just slightly advanced. Inscriptions on
the bases of statues of both sexes are
invariably lists of titles and names. The well-
known offering formula “for the ka of” does
not appear until the very end of the period,
but it becomes standard during the First
Intermediate Period and the Middle
Kingdom. This is why the usual name chosen
by Egyptologists for tomb statues in both
wood and stone is “ka statues”.
Figure 4. Examples of wigs and skirts.
First Intermediate Period and Middle Kingdom
During the First Intermediate Period and
Middle Kingdom, the emphasis shifts from
the tomb owner and his wife alone to include
models of daily life as well. Particularly fine
examples of female offering bearers are
known from the tomb of Meketra, for
example (fig. 5). These female offering bearers
are probably personifications of funerary
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 4
Figure 5. Female offering bearer from the tomb of
Meketra. JE 46725.
estates, three-dimensional examples of the
friezes of personified estates decorating the
lower parts of many temples. As the period
progresses, the quality of the figures and
models in general once again declines,
although there are still a few exceptional
pieces. The average size of wooden statues
decreases after the 11th Dynasty, and although
the range of costumes and wigs on male
statues is much wider, there is still no
prospect of identifying individual costumes
and wigs with particular offices. One notable
exception is the statue of Yuya in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York,
which depicts him wearing the vizier’s
costume (fig. 6). Tombs and even simple
graves in the provincial cemeteries, for
example, at Beni Hassan, now often contain
Figure 6. Statue of Yuya. Metropolitan Museum of
Art 23.3.37.
wooden statues of the tomb owner, resulting
in a corpus of about 500 statues in total.
Female statues resemble those from the Old
Kingdom, with the addition of new wig types.
Perhaps the most notable difference is that
the females now have very pronounced waists
and hips.
The earliest extant royal statues in wood
date to the 12th Dynasty (for example, the
statues of Senusret I in Cairo and New York).
Wooden shabtis are also known from the
Middle Kingdom, but the best examples date
to the New Kingdom.
New Kingdom
As yet, no systematic research has been
conducted into wooden statuary after the end
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 5
Figure 7. Guardian figure from tomb of
Tutankhamen. 1.92 m. JE 60708.
of the Middle Kingdom. A preliminary survey
has revealed that the wooden statues from the
first part of the 18th Dynasty continued to be
inspired by the Middle Kingdom and are full
of force and character. Model scenes
disappear as do the female offering bearers.
The New Kingdom types appear to duplicate
those from the same period in stone to a
greater extent than in the earlier periods, and
it is at last sometimes possible to link
costumes to particular functions. The
elaborate clothing of the later 18 th Dynasty,
for example, with its many pleats and folds
was duplicated not only on the plaster coating
but also in the wood itself, thus enabling us to
identify military officers, priests, and
priestesses with a much greater degree of
certainty than before, even when the base of a
statue is missing. When the base is extant, the
names and titles of the deceased as well as an
offering formula are now often accompanied
by a dedicatory text. The dedicators are
usually the son or daughter of the deceased,
but often the parents, a brother, or sister
appear, perhaps indicating that the deceased
had died young. The preliminary total for
New Kingdom statues is about 80 male and
80 female, with over three quarters of that
total dating to the period from Amenhotep III
through the 19th Dynasty. Two interesting
subgroups of statues come from the Deir el-
Medina necropolis. One subgroup comprises
statues of the tomb owners holding a standard
crowned by a sacred emblem, often a hawk’s
head or a ram’s head; the other subgroup
consists of statues of the deified Ahmose-
Nefertari, the wife of Amenhotep I. An
interesting extra detail concerning the
subgroup of standard bearers is a carved relief
of either the wife or son on the left-hand side.
Pair statues are extremely uncommon in all
periods; for example, only three are known
from after the second half of the 18th
Dynasty.
Royal Sculpture
Royal sculpture in wood is much more
common in the New Kingdom, and many
royal tombs and temples of the period were
provided with resin-coated or gilded wooden
statues. The larger, life-size ones are usually
freestanding statues of the king (e.g., the
statues from the tombs of Thutmose III,
Tutankhamen, and Horemheb) (fig. 7),
whereas the smaller ones are ritual statues
usually placed in wooden shrines. The latter
show the king striding while wearing the white
or red crown, harpooning in a papyrus skiff,
or standing on the back of a panther. Statues
of queens are much less numerous and seem
also to be on a much smaller scale. However,
they are no less magnificent when they do
survive, for example, the wooden head of
Queen Tiy, which was recently reunited with
its headdress (fig. 8). A pair of statues of
Amenhotep III and Queen Tiy, found at Kom
Medinet Ghurab in the Fayum and now in the
Roemer- und Pelizaeus-Museum Hildesheim,
also deserve mention—despite their tiny size
(60 and 60.5 mm, respectively), the detail is
exceptional. Votive statues of the deified
Ahmose-Nefertari became popular during the
Ramesside Period (see above).
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 6
Figure 8. Head of Queen Tiy. 95 mm. Berlin
Museum. Inv.-No. 21834.
Third Intermediate Period, Late Period, and
Ptolemaic and Roman Periods
During the later Egyptian periods, private
wooden statuary becomes much less
common, although this could be an accident
of preservation. A total of only four statues in
wood of male and female tomb owners are
currently known from the Third Intermediate
Period, 25 from the Late Period, and only
three from the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods.
Those from the Late Period, like most art of
that time, imitate Middle Kingdom styles.
Also during this period, kneeling figures of
Isis and Nephthys begin to be placed on
either side of the sarcophagus in the burial
chambers of private tombs (fig. 9); ba-birds,
falcons, and akhom figures (archaic figure of a
perched falcon), as well as Anubis jackals were
placed on top. Ptah-Sokar-Osiris figures,
often with a cavity containing a papyrus roll,
were also popular.
Figure 9. Two statues of Isis and Nephthys. Late
Period. Roemer-Pelizaeus-Museum Hildesheim.
Inv.-No. 1583/4.
Bibliographic Notes
Wooden statuary has rarely been studied as a separate category. The main exception so far is the
monograph by Julia Harvey, Wooden Statues of the Old Kingdom (2001a), which offers dating criteria
based on stylistic changes. Harvey’s further work includes a comparative study of some female
wooden statues from the Middle Kingdom (1991-), an analysis of wood statues and female
offering bearers (2006), as well as an overview of wood sculpture (2001b). Studies such as that by
Jacques Vandier, Manuel d’Archéologie Égyptienne (1958), and Bodil Hornemann, Types of Ancient
Egyptian Statuary (1951-), are indispensable for locating extant statues in both wood and stone.
Vandier’s work is still the most comprehensive discussion of Egyptian statuary to date—a mine
of information and illustrations from the Old Kingdom to the end of the New Kingdom. Gay
Robins’ Proportion and Style in Ancient Egyptian Art (1994) opened up a whole new way of studying
statuary by setting out the rules of proportion followed by Egyptian craftsmen. The Representations
of Statuary in Private Tombs of the Old Kingdom (1984) by Marianne Eaton-Krauss is a thorough
discussion of two-dimensional representations of wood and stone tomb statues depicted in wall
scenes in Old Kingdom mastabas. Nicholas Reeves’ The Complete Tutankhamun: The King, the Tomb,
Wooden Statuary, Harvey, UEE 2009 7
the Royal Treasure (1990: in particular 130 - 139) presents an overview of ritual figures and magical
objects. References to similar statues from other royal tombs can be found in the relevant
sections in Reeves and Wilkinson (1996). For a comprehensive list of statues see Porter and Moss
(1960-). Helmut Satzinger (1982) gives a detailed study of the standard-bearing statues from the
New Kingdom. William S. Smith’s A History of Egyptian Sculpture and Painting in the Old Kingdom
(1949) is a fundamental study of Old Kingdom art, including wood sculpture. Angela Tooley
(1995) presents an introduction for the general reader to models and scenes, including offering
bearers in wood and in stone.