T
During the Byzantine Period and later, the
number of surviving temples was further
diminished. The walls were dismantled, the
limestone blocks being taken away to the lime
kilns and the granite blocks being reused in
the construction of villages, cities, and
Byzantine or Islamic-Period monuments,
while the mudbrick remains suffered from the
activities of the sebakhin and the deteriorating
influence of the wet Delta climate. This may
explain why the Temple of Hibis in the
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 2
Kharga Oasis, at the edge of the depression, is
comparatively so much better preserved. A
large number of Late-Period temple sites have
been only partially explored. The recent
excavations in Tanis, Bubastis, Athribis,
Mendes, Sais, Buto, and Tell el-Balamun are
beginning to fill in some of the voids in our
knowledge.
Characteristics and Innovations
Several innovations, which appear to be
elements of the transition from the New
Kingdom temple to the Ptolemaic, can be
discerned in the concept of Late Period
temples and surrounding areas. At Tanis, Sais,
and Mendes, the royal tombs were built inside
the temenos walls (Quack 2006; Stadelmann
1971). Similarly, the funerary chapels of the
Divine Adoratrice/God’s Wife of Amun were
located within the precinct of Medinet Habu.
In the Kushite Period (25 th Dynasty) the
entrance of the temple was embellished with a
colonnade, which foreshadows the kiosk
structure featured in many temples dated to
the Ptolemaic Period. The temple of Amun at
Hibis, dated to the Persian Period (27 th
Dynasty), has several chapels on the roof,
which likewise prefigure roof chapels of the
Ptolemaic Period. In Dynasty 30 an intense
program to construct enormous mudbrick
enclosure walls was inaugurated to protect
temples from outside threats. In the same
period, but apparent as early as the 26 th
Dynasty, the number of hardstone naoi
(shrines that house the statue of the god) in
the temples increases. These shrines are
decorated with complex scenes or long
mythological texts, such as those from Saft el-
Henna. The style of the 26th Dynasty is
characterized by a preference for “archaizing”
art, to be distinguished from the “archaistic”
art of the 30th Dynasty (Arnold 1999: 308 -
309; Bothmer 1960: XXXVII).
The Third Intermediate Period
At the end of the 20th Dynasty a division takes
place between the Theban king-priests,
starting with Herihor, and the new dynasty
founded by Smendes, which establishes itself
at Tanis. At Karnak, Pinedjem continues the
decoration of the Khonsu temple and during
his reign restorations took place at Medinet
Habu, as attested by the restoration texts. The
creation of Tanis—the Egyptian Djanet,
capital of the pharaohs of the 21 st Dynasty, in
the northeastern Delta on the Pelusiac branch
of the Nile—is the most striking event of this
period (Brissaud 1987, 1998: 19 - 32, Brissaud
and Zivie-Coche 1998, 2000; fig. 1). In the
northern part of the site, a vast temenos was
surrounded by an enormous mudbrick wall,
on which stamps of the cartouche of
Psusennes I have been found. Psusennes I
had constructed there a temple of Amun-Ra
“Lord of the Throne of the Two Lands,” of
which the foundation deposits have been
found, but which has subsequently been
remodeled and enlarged to such an extent that
it is impossible to say what the original
building looked like (fig. 2). The mudbrick
enclosure wall also included the area where
had been established the tombs of the kings
and members of the royal families of both the
21 st and 22nd dynasties (Smendes, Psusennes I,
Ramses-Ankhefenmut, Undebaundjed,
Amenemope, Osorkon I, Siamun, Psusennes
II, Osorkon II, Takelot I, Shoshenq II,
Hornakht, Takelot II, Shoshenq III). The
tombs were polytaphs, containing a number
of burials, and after various changes served as
royal cachettes (Roulin 1998). This radical
innovation was probably instigated by the
layout of the site of Tanis itself: a sandy tell in
the midst of agricultural land, far removed
from the gebel—the mountains that form the
natural boundary of the Nile valley, where for
centuries the tombs of the pharaohs and the
elite were chiseled out. The tradition of royal
burial within the temenos walls continued at
Sais (Spencer, N. 2006) by the rulers of the
26 th Dynasty, whose tombs unfortunately
have been plundered, and at Mendes, in the
burial chamber of Nepherites I (Redford
2004). The sarcophagus of Nectanebo II, re-
used and finally found at Alexandria, may
have originally been part of a burial in
Memphis.
From its beginning Tanis was conceived of
as a northern replica of Thebes, where, in
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 3
addition to Amun, Mut and Khonsu were
venerated. The Mut temple, south of the
precinct of Amun, is definitively dated to the
Third Intermediate Period: foundation
deposits with the name of Siamun have been
discovered at the entrance gate. A temple
dedicated to Khonsu may have been built at
that time north of the Amun temple, later to
be rebuilt during the 30 th Dynasty, as
demonstrated by the discovery of statues of
the god in the form of a baboon, with
cartouches of Psusennes I. During the 21st
Dynasty, a temple dedicated to Amun of Ipet,
discovered as recently as the end of the
twentieth century, was built on the southern
part of the tell, modeling the one in Luxor.
Building activities of the kings of the 21st
Dynasty are rarely encountered in other parts
of Egypt (Jansen-Winkeln 2007a). The few
examples are the temple of Isis at Giza (Zivie-
Coche 1991: 45 - 79) and, at Memphis, a
chapel with the name of Siamun, dedicated by
Ankhefenmut.
Figure 1. Plan of the site of Tanis.
During the 22nd Dynasty (Jansen-Winkeln
2007b) Shoshenq I erected a temple to Amun-
Ra “Great of Fame, Lord of the Promontory”
at el-Hiba/Teudjoi. At Karnak he built the
Bubastide gate and a double colonnade along
the court in front of the second pylon. On the
southern portico an inscription of the “Annals
of Osorkon” can be found, which has been
dated to years 11 and 12 of Takelot I
(Caminos 1958; The Epigraphic Survey
1954). Osorkon II was a prolific builder, of
whose constructions we find remains in
Upper as well as Lower Egypt. Planning to be
buried at Tanis, he considerably enlarged the
main temple, where the second and third
pylons are attributed to his reign. These
gateways, their entrances conspicuously
flanked by pairs of obelisks, are impressive
even today. Columns from the Old Kingdom,
already reused by Ramses II (probably at Pi-
Ramesse, the present-day Qantir), were
transported to Tanis, where Osorkon II
usurped them by inscribing his name.
Figure 2. General view of the Temple of Amun.
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 4
Moreover, they have been found outside the
temple complex of Amun-Ra there, where
they had again been reused, perhaps during
the 30th Dynasty, in what is now a dilapidated
ruin known as the “East Temple” (fig. 3).
Shoshenq III added to the temple complex,
particularly by building a monumental access
gate at the west side, which remained
functional for the duration of the temple’s
use. In addition, we know that Shoshenq V
built a temple, subsequently dismantled.
Building stones bearing his name have been
found reused in the construction of the sacred
lake of the 30th Dynasty.
Figure 3. Column with the name of Osorkon II,
re-used in the “Eastern Temple” at Tanis.
The temple of Bubastis benefited from
important additions by Osorkon II, who had a
special connection to the goddess Bastet,
“Lady of Bubastis” (Habachi 1957; Tietze
2003): a monumental gate was erected,
decorated with sed-festival scenes that present
details not attested elsewhere (Naville 1892;
Fig. 4).
A practice characteristic of the Third
Intermediate Period was to erect “donation
stelae,” which guaranteed the temple
donations specified upon them. These stelae
have very specific formulations and a unique
iconography. They are particularly numerous
during the 21 st and 22nd dynasties and have
also been attested for the 26 th (Saite) Dynasty,
but become increasingly rare after that period.
The donation formulae clearly show that
private individuals with links to the temple,
Figure 4. Reconstruction of the gate of Osorkon II
at Bubastis.
such as gate-keepers, would receive a plot of
land from the king (or from a great chief of
the Meshwesh during the Libyan Period)
through an intermediary official. The recipient
would have the right to work the land in
exchange for payment of part of the harvest
to the temple (Meeks 1979b). This well-
recorded system gives important information
on the administrative and economic function
of temples at this time.
The period of the Libyan anarchy (Gomaà
1974; Yoyotte 1961) has left scant
architectural remains. Best known are the
tombs of military and religious dignitaries: in
Memphis, the tomb of prince Shoshenq, son
of Osorkon II and high priest of Ptah (Badawi
1956); and at Herakleopolis, the tombs of
several great chiefs of the Ma (Pérez-Die and
Vernus 1992).
The 25 th Dynasty
The Kushite kings exercised their power
primarily at Thebes, although Memphis was
also the object of their attention, as indicated
by the “Shabaqo Stone” (Junker 1940), a copy
of an ancient mythological text, the
cosmological part probably Ramesside (the
dating of this important document is still
under debate). A further indication of the
importance of the northern city was a
restoration decree, on a stele of Taharqo, for
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 5
the Memphite temple of “Amun at the head
of the gods” (Meeks 1979a). Previously,
Piankhy had recorded his offerings in all the
temples of the conquered land on his victory
stele, found at Gebel Barkal (Grimal 1981).
In the temple of Karnak, Taharqo built a
western colonnade in the temple court west of
the second pylon, of which only one column
is extant today, while of the other columns
only the lower parts and remains of the
“screen” walls that once connected the
columns have been preserved. Three
additional colonnades at each of the other
cardinal points completed the design. A
similar construction was built in front of the
temple of Montu in north Karnak and at the
entrance of the 18th -Dynasty temple at
Medinet Habu (Leclant 1965). The most
original monument is the Edifice of Taharqo
(Cooney 2000; Parker et al. 1979), built near
the sacred lake of Karnak. At present only the
subterranean part of the structure is extant,
the superstructure having been for the most
part destroyed. There is no building that
parallels this unique structure; we therefore
have no comparison on which to base a
reconstruction of the upper part. The
underground rooms are dedicated to Amun-
Ra, narrowly associated with Osiris. The walls
are decorated with the Litany of Ra, a hymn to
the ten bas of Amun, and the first known
representation of the Mount of Djeme, which
was thought to cover the cenotaph of Osiris
on the west bank of the Nile at Thebes. The
fundamental aspects of the theology of Amun
that become manifest during the Late Period
are found for the first time on the walls of the
Edifice of Taharqo. A restoration text of
Montuemhat, governor of Thebes, inscribed
in one of the small rooms of the Mut temple
(Leclant 1961), relates a temple inventory that
took place during the reign of Taharqo as part
of a program of repairs executed at that time.
The rulers of the 25 th Dynasty also
constructed several temples in southern Egypt
and northern Sudan, at Tabo, Kawa
(Macadam 1949-), and Sanam. These were
mostly dedicated to Amun and built on the
classical Egyptian model, with the exception
of particular details that might reflect
relationships with local cults. At the foot of
the sacred mountain at Gebel Barkal the cult
spaces were transformed or rebuilt.
The style of sculpture and relief is
characterized by the search for a certain
classicism, of which the paradigms hark back
to the Old Kingdom (Memphis) and Middle
Kingdom (Thebes). This taste for archaism
continued in the succeeding dynasty.
The 26 th Dynasty (Saite Period)
During the rule of the pharaohs who hailed
from Sais (El-Sayed 1975), the towns of the
Delta became the focus of great development.
The temples were restored or rebuilt; the local
cults blossomed. A good indication of this
remarkable apex is the clerical titulary—that
is, priestly titles that either were known from
earlier texts, or occur in this period for the
first time. Their associated functions were
often linked to a specific god, worshiped in a
specific temple. The Theban region was
mostly under the direct influence of the divine
adoratrices, whose power had been
established since the early Third Intermediate
Period. Their names, inscribed on
monuments, are given the same status as that
of the kings who installed them in office. The
office disappeared at the end of the 26th
Dynasty (Graefe 1981).
Given the poor preservation of most of the
Delta sites, we often have only the temple
foundations and certain stone elements
remaining, while the temple superstructures
have completely disappeared. The temple of
Amun at Tell el-Balamun/Sema-Behedet was
completely renovated under Psammetichus I
(Spencer, J. 1996, 1999, 2003). The ongoing
excavations at Buto give us a basic idea of the
temple of Wadjit, built by Amasis. The same
is true for the temples of Sais, although
excavations have revealed very few remains in
situ (Wilson 2006). At Mendes, Amasis rebuilt
the temple of Banebdjed. Of the four
monumental monolithic naoi, dedicated to
Shu, Geb, Ra, and Osiris—the four bas of
Banebdjed—only one is standing today,
dominating an open field (De Meulenaere and
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 6
MacKay 1976; Lilyquist Soghor 1967). At
Tanis the discovery of foundation deposits
bearing the name of Apries indicates the
period in which the Mut temple was
renovated and embellished with a columned
court fronting the temple. Similar renovations
were carried out in the time of Apries of the
temples of Amun and Amun of Ipet. In this
period there were also building activities in
Imet (Tell Nabasha/Tell Faraun) and Pithom
(Tell el-Maskhuta), where Ramesside
monuments from Tell el-Rataba in the Wadi
Tumilat were re-used. In Memphis the
building activities concentrated on a
restoration of the Serapeum and the
construction of the palace of Apries. The
many stelae dedicated to the deceased Apis
date to this period (Malinine et al. 1968).
The cult of Osiris became increasingly
important in the 26th Dynasty—a
development that began in the 25 h Dynasty, as
witnessed by several shrines at Karnak. In the
northern section of the temple complex there,
several chapels were dedicated to specific
forms of Osiris, such as “Osiris Wennefer,
Neb Djefau” (Osiris Wennefer, Lord of
Nourishment) and “Osiris Hery-ib pa Ished”
(Osiris Who Resides in the Persea Tree). The
buildings are inscribed with the names of the
contemporary ruling pharaohs and divine
adoratrices. The latter also erected several
chapels in the Montu temple complex in
north Karnak, while their funerary chapels
were located within the walls of Medinet
Habu (Hölscher 1954). To the south, at El-
Kab, a temple of Psammetichus I has been
brought to light (fig. 5), and several other
temples in Upper Egypt were embellished in
this period.
Remains of several 26th -Dynasty temples in
the oases indicate important cult activities in
the Libyan Desert. At Siwa the Egyptian-style
temple of Aghurmi was dedicated to the form
of Amun popular in the oasis: the god
depicted with the head of a ram. This temple
was built at the time of Amasis and is the only
26 th -Dynasty construction of which more than
the foundations remain (Colin 1998;
Kuhlmann 1988). The name of Amasis is also
found on several chapels in Ain Muftella in
the Bahariya Oasis. These chapels were part
of a carefully designed decorative program,
displaying an elaborate pantheon (Labrique
2004).
Figure 5. View of the temple at El-Kab.
In spite of the fragmentary state of many of
the monuments of the 26th Dynasty, the style
of decoration displays a high degree of both
artistry and epigraphy, with a sophistication
that is typical for this period of archaizing
workmanship. Many temples are embellished
in this period with naoi of hard stone, such as
granite or greywacke (Roeder 1914). Typical
also is the widespread use of Egyptian bekhen
stone. Two good examples are the naos of
Mefky (Louvre D29), dedicated to a local
form of Osiris and dated to the rule of
Amasis, and the naos of Baqlieh (Zivie 1975),
dedicated to Thoth “who separates the two
companions” (Cairo CG70008). The temple
courts housed an abundance of statues of
priests who lived during the 26th Dynasty, or
slightly later, such as Neshor, Wedjahorresne,
and Horkhebi (Heise 2007). These statues
typically have an autobiographical text
inscribed on their back pillar. The inscriptions
provide us with a record of the existence of
temples for which we have no other evidence
and they contain information on temple
function and decoration for which we have no
other sources (for example, Vernus 1978).
The 27 th to 29 th Dynasties
In spite of the Greek historians’ traditionally
anti-Persian sentiment underscoring the
aggressive manipulations of the Achaemenids
in Egypt, the kings of the 27th Dynasty (the
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 7
Figure 6. Plan of the Hibis Temple.
Figure 7. Detail of the cella of the Hibis Temple: South wall, fifth register: gods of the Hermopolitan
region.
First Persian Period) apparently did not pillage
or destroy the Egyptian temples, nor did they
kill the sacred Apis bull, a sacrilegious crime
often attributed to the Persian rulers
(Devauchelle 1995). Little evidence from this
period has survived in the Nile Valley or the
Delta, apart from stelae found during the
excavation of the Suez Canal (Posener 1936).
In contrast, evidence from the Kharga
Oasis is extremely well preserved, if not
abundant. There, the temple at Hibis remains
the only witness to the scope and nature of
the building activities during the Late Period,
before the start of the Ptolemaic Period.
Construction at Hibis may have begun in the
26 th Dynasty, but the temple was primarily
built during the succeeding (27th) dynasty and
decorated mostly by Darius. The temple was
completed during the rule of the 30th -Dynasty
king Nectanebo II. The construction follows
the plan of the traditional Egyptian temple,
but underwent a number of modifications
(Winlock 1941; fig. 6).
The temple at Hibis was dedicated to
Amun, “Lord of Hibis.” It contains, on one
side, an adaptation of the Theban theology
and, on the other, several rooms dedicated to
Osiris. The decorative program encompassed
notable peculiarities that have not been found
elsewhere. The decorated naos has nine
registers on its walls, which contain
approximately 700 representations of both
gods and of what may perhaps be divine
statues. At the head of these representations,
the king is shown in each register performing
a ritual (Cruz-Uribe 1988: pp. 1 -43; Davies
1953: pls. 2 - 5). Grouped by sepat
(geographic-religious entities) they present an
overview of the active cults of the time,
organized by region (fig. 7). Interestingly, each
sepat takes a form of Osiris. In spite of the
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 8
brevity, or complete absence, of explanatory
texts, the richness of these images, many of
which are unique, provides an extraordinary
glimpse into the theological developments of
the Late Period. By comparing these images
with the earlier glosses in the mythological
Delta Papyrus (Meeks 2006), or with the later
Ptolemaic temple inscriptions, we find a
consistent number of cults. Thus the Egyptian
pantheon, or at least a large part of it, was
brought together on the walls of the cella of
the Amun temple at Hibis. The naos was, in
effect, conceived of as a microcosmos
wherein the gods of Egypt were gathered and
the yearly rebirth of Osiris celebrated. This is
a very different vision than that provided by
Ptolemaic temple-reliefs, wherein the king was
portrayed leading a procession of geographic
divinities towards the main god of the temple.
The latter emphasized the organization of the
religious provinces, each sepat being listed with
their principal god, their town, and the
geographical divisions.
The hypostyle hall of the Hibis temple was
also decorated in an unusual fashion. The
walls were laid out as an enormous papyrus
roll decorated with vignettes and containing a
series of hymns to Amun (Davies 1953: pls.
31 - 33; Klotz 2006). Several passages of these
hymns are known from earlier texts, such as
the “magical” Papyrus Harris and the hymn to
the ten bas of Amun from the Edifice of
Taharqo at Karnak, which is one of the first
examples of a religious hymn reproduced on a
wall painting—a common feature in the later
Ptolemaic temples.
During the 27th (Persian) Dynasty a
mudbrick temple dedicated to Osiris-iw was
built in the southern part of the Kharga Oasis.
Excavation of this temple (at the site of Ayn
Manawir, near Dush) has yielded numerous
bronze statues of the god as well as a large
quantity of demotic ostraca (Wuttmann et al.
1996).
The 28 th and 29th dynasties have left very
few traces, most likely due to prevailing
political difficulties. Sparsely scattered
inscribed blocks have been found bearing the
names of Amyrtaios, Nepherites I, and
Psammuthis (Traunecker 1979). Only the
building activities of Hakoris are manifest,
especially at Karnak, where his name has been
found on the decoration of a bark station in
front of the Temple of Amun. This ruler also
ordered the restoration of the columns of
Thutmose III in the small temple of Medinet
Habu (Traunecker 1981). Among his
dedications we find evidence for a cult,
performed every ten days, wherein Amun of
Ipet worshipped the primordeal gods who rest
in the Mount of Djeme. We know details of the
theology surrounding this cult from Ptolemaic
inscriptions in the Theban region. Another
rare witness of this period is the sarcophagus
of Nepherites I, which was found in the
temple precinct of Banebdjed in Mendes, but
the structure that once accommodated it is
unfortunately in poor condition (Redford
2004).
The 30 th Dynasty
Between the difficulties at the end of the 29th
Dynasty and the Second Persian Period,
which was much more violent than the first,
Egypt was relatively calm and prosperous
under the 30th -Dynasty rulers, who hailed
from Sebennytos (Samanud) in the Delta
(Spencer, N. 1999). In consequence, we see a
wave of significant building activity
throughout the country, frequently started by
Nectanebo I and finished by Nectanebo II,
the last indigenous pharaoh. Often these
constructions served as a point of departure
for later Ptolemaic temples, such as the ones
at Philae, or the Iseum at Behbet el-Haggar
(Favard-Meeks 1991: 449 - 451). The two
kings used their royal prerogatives to establish
a cult for their statues during their lifetime,
sometimes under protection of the Horus
falcon (De Meulenaere 1960). The art of this
period is sometimes characterized as
“archaizing,” stemming from the search for
models in the recent past, mostly those
developed during the 26th Dynasty. Also
noticeable, however, are original elements,
which develop further during the following
period. On the architectural front the
introduction of the wabet represents an
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 9
innovation. This is an open court in the
temple building with a small adjacent room
for the New Year’s ritual, such as that seen in
the Temple of Khnum at Elephantine. We
also see the creation of the first “mammisis,”
or birth temples, such as those at Dendara
and Philae. The number of shrines increases
in temples of the 30th Dynasty. The style of
reliefs, as well as that of statuary, changes
considerably, with more rounded and realistic
forms, and the division of the torso in three
parts—an element that becomes more
pronounced in later periods. Typical also is
the use of hard stone, for both statuary and
naoi.
In order to defend temples against
increasing threats of violence, Nectanebo I
initiated an enormous project of building
mudbrick enclosure walls around several
temple compounds, often to be finished by
Nectanebo II. At Tanis, in the area of the
Amun temple, a new wall was built, which
was much more substantial than the one made
by Psusennes. The new wall encompassed the
temple of Horus of Mesen and incorporated
the main entrance—the gate of Sheshonk
III—on the west. The temples of Mendes and
Tell el-Balamun were likewise protected with
large temenos walls. In the south the
enormous enclosure wall of Karnak was built,
including a new stone pylon on the west side,
which remained unfinished, and monumental
gateways at the other cardinal points. These
were decorated in the Ptolemaic Period, but
the processional route to Luxor, flanked by
sphinxes, was enhanced during the 30 th
Dynasty (Cabrol 2001). Dendara and El-Kab
benefited from similar protective building
efforts. The mudbrick walls show an
innovative technique: the walls were no longer
conceived of as one unit, but as a succession
of alternating sunken and raised sections,
which provide better cohesion of the whole.
Moreover, the mudbrick courses are slightly
curved, resulting in a wave pattern along the
length of the wall (Spencer, J. 1979).
Inside the enclosure walls, massive
mudbrick structures were built, known as
shena-wab, whose function is not well
understood and too little discussed. It appears
that their role was primarily economic, though
they without doubt had links of a religious
nature as well (Traunecker 1987).
At Tanis the temple of Amun underwent
several alterations during the 30th Dynasty. A
colonnade was probably added to the
forecourt, re-using columns of the Old
Kingdom. Two deep wells also date to this
period. The temple of Khons was completely
rebuilt, and a sacred lake was excavated
nearby, with supporting walls built of re-used
blocks from the Third Intermediate or Saite
Period. The limestone wall that enclosed the
temple of Amun was restored, as is attested
by a foundation deposit of Nectanebo I. The
obelisks in front and behind the Temple of
Amun were possibly also erected in the 30th
Dynasty. A temple dedicated to Horus of
Mesen, rebuilt during the Ptolemaic Period,
was erected south of the temple of Amun
inside the enclosure wall of the 30th Dynasty
and was perhaps related to the poorly
preserved “East Temple.”
The rulers of the 30 th Dynasty were active
in Pi-Soped (Saft el-Henna), as can be
deduced from naoi of Nectanebo I found
there, though we find hardly a trace remaining
of an associated temple. The extant naoi
feature truly original decoration: one (Cairo
CG 70021) bears representations of gods and
divine statuary (Naville 1888; Fig. 8); another,
thought to be from Ismailia, is inscribed with
a mythological text that describes the quarrel
between the god Shu and his son Geb (Goyon
1936); and the “naos of the decades” (Louvre
D37 and Cairo JE 25774), also dated to
Nectanebo I (Habachi and Habachi 1952), is
broken into several fragments, others of
which may be among the fragments found
recently in the bay of Abuqir (von Bomhard
2006). Fragments of a naos of Nectanebo II
have been discovered in Bubastis (Spencer, N.
2006).
In Naukratis, a stele of Nectanebo I (Cairo
JE 34002) displays epigraphy of high quality
and provides detailed information relating to
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 10
Figure 8. Naos of Saft el-Henna, with the name of
Nectanebo I, Cairo CG 70021.
taxes—including information on “custom”
(import) regulations and tax deductions
granted to the temple of Neith (Lichtheim
1976). Recently an almost identical stele was
discovered in the underwater excavations in
the bay of Abuqir, indicating the location of
the sunken city of Thônis/Herakleion
(Yoyotte 2006). A stele of Nectanebo at
Hermopolis/Ashmunein (Cairo JE 72130)
indicates the construction there of a temple of
the goddess Useret-Nehemtawyt and a temple
of Thoth, both of which were protected by a
new enclosure wall (Roeder 1954, 1959;
Spencer, J. 1989). Though construction of the
Temple of Isis, on the island of Philae in
Aswan, had begun in the 26 th Dynasty, as
witnessed by inscribed blocks bearing the
name of Amasis, the building was expanded
by Nectanebo I. On the island of Elephantine,
under Nectanebo II, work started on a new
temple of Khnum, which was provided with
the new wabet feature (Jenni 1998;
Niederberger 1999). The erection of 30th -
Dynasty cult structures took place far into the
Western (or Libyan) desert, in the Bahariya
Oasis, where the name of a certain Wenamun
“Great Chief of the Desert” has been found
inscribed in the remains (Gallo 2006).
After the devastation that took place during
the Second Persian Period, Egypt went
through a period of major development that
included the reconstruction of existing
temples and the creation of new religious
structures—an ambitious project that was
continued and intensified during the
Ptolemaic Period. It should be emphasized
that, prior to the Second Persian Period, both
the temple design and the cults celebrated
within had witnessed profound
transformations, such as the creation of the
wabet (the open court dedicated to the
celebration of the New Year), the addition of
chambers for the cult of Osiris, and the
creation of the birth house, or mammisi,
where the birth of the child-god was
celebrated. The latter was a continuation of a
development that had begun in the Third
Intermediate Period, in which an emphasis on
birth replaced that of the royal-divine
marriage. Khons-the-Child, son of Amun and
Mut, is held in high favor, but most often
represented is the child-god Horus, in his
various forms as Harpocrates “Horus the
Infant”; Harsiese “Horus, Son of Isis”; or
Harendotes “Horus, the Avenger of his
Father.” His reputation has been linked to the
Late-Period popularity of Isis and Osiris,
which is manifest in the grand Osirian
festivals held in the month of Khoiak to
celebrate the rebirth of the deceased god, and
in the establishment of an Iseum in several
locations, such as Behbet el-Haggar and
Philae. At the same time a complex and subtle
theology of Amun was developed at Thebes.
Amun himself, worshiped in his temples at
Karnak and Luxor, honored, in his form of
Amun of Ipet, a mortuary cult performed
every 10 days for the deceased ancestor gods
buried in the Mount of Djeme, located on the
west bank, not far from the cemetery area. It
is questioned whether the god may have
actually visited himself every ten days, or
whether “substitution cults” performed the
cult in his place (Traunecker 1981).
Late Period Temples, Zivie-Coche, UEE 2008 11
It should be noted that the last indigenous
dynasties saw the start of the development of
enormous animal-necropoli, such as the
Anubieion at Saqqara (Jeffreys and Smith
1988), where tens of thousands of mummified
falcons, ibises, cats, and dogs were deposited,
and which reflects a practice—different from
that of the sacred-Apis cult—that would
become especially popular in the Ptolemaic
Period.
Bibliographic Notes
The history of the Late Period is very complex and many points of chronology and succession are
still under debate. Yoyotte (1961) and Kitchen (1996, 3rd edition) were pioneers of Late Period
scholarship. See also Gomaà (1974). Jansen-Winkeln (2006) is a recent publication with extensive
bibliography. We have acquired knowledge of building activities in Egypt during the first
millennium BCE thanks to excavation reports of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (e.g.,
Badawi 1956; Brissaud 1987, 1998; Brissaud and Zivie-Coche 1998, 2000; Hölscher 1939; Naville
1888, 1892; Pérez-Die and Vernus 1992) and to publications of the temple inscriptions (Davies
1953; Parker et al. 1979). For textual evidence of temple furnishings see Meeks (1979b) and
Roeder (1954). Recent excavations, many of which are ongoing, offer a better understanding of
the evolution and transformation of Late Period sites by providing improved topographic maps
and plans (e.g., Redford 2004; Spencer, J. 1989, 1996, 1999, 2003; Spencer, N. 2006). Arnold
(1999) has compiled a synthesis that includes the Ptolemaic Period; caution is required when
using this publication, however, as several of the plans do not correspond with the visible reality,
while others are merely hypothetical. Monographs dedicated to a site and its surroundings (e.g.,
Vernus 1978; Zivie-Coche 1991; Zivie 1975) are written from the perspective of the Kulttopographie
or the géographie religieuse, offering at the same time a diachronic and synchronic overview of the
history of Late Period temples and their cults