ottery is fired in order to effect
the change from clay, a plastic
material, into aplastic ceramic
(see Rice 1987: 102 - 110). This is done by
first evaporating the water that lubricates the
clay platelets and renders the clay malleable,
then driving off the water that is chemically
combined in the clay mineral structure. The
clay platelets subsequently begin to fuse
together at their edges in a process known as
“sintering.” This is the first stage in
vitrification and varies according to the clay
type but usually begins between 600C and
700C. If continued to higher temperatures
the clay would eventually become fully
vitrified and collapse after becoming
essentially molten. Firing aims to sinter the
material to a point below complete
vitrification, so rendering the clay ceramic.
The history of the kiln is a history of
improvements or changes to the way that
pottery is fired and encompasses
arrangements that would not strictly qualify as
“kilns.” Holthoer (1977: 34 - 35) has
attempted to provide a fourfold classification
of kilns, but this has not gained wide
acceptance and is inconsistently applied in his
examples. A simpler classification has been
proposed (Nicholson 1993: 108), making
three broad distinctions: 1) open firing; 2)
firing structures; and 3) updraft kilns. The
latter might be further subdivided as
suggested by Arnold (1976, 1986). A fourth
type, the downdraft kiln, is not encountered in
Pharaonic Egypt.
P
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 2
Open Firing
Among the methods that do not employ a
fixed kiln structure is the so-called “open
firing,” sometimes referred to as “bonfire
firing,” although this latter term implies a
rather less orderly arrangement than is usually
the case. In open firing the fuel is stacked
over (and sometimes among) the vessels (see
Hodges 1981: 35 - 41). Maximum
temperatures reached in an open fire are
comparable to those of an unroofed updraft
kiln and quite sophisticated results can be
obtained. Temperatures of up to c. 1000°C
can be reached—the upper range of the firing
of pottery referred to as “terracotta” (Rice
1987: 82). By its nature an open firing leaves
little or no detectable archaeological trace, and
any remains that do survive could be mistaken
for a large domestic hearth. Indeed, small
quantities of pottery may have been fired at
the domestic hearth, and it should be
remembered that many clays will begin to
vitrify at temperatures between 600°C and
800°C.
Open firing may suffer from lack of control
of the firing and from the smudging of the
vessels from contact with the fuel; it is
furthermore susceptible to sudden changes in
weather conditions. Over wide areas of the
world this latter problem was countered by
firing in trenches, as did the Hopi of North
America, or by adding a small wall around the
base of the fuel heap, as was done in parts of
India. These strategies might be regarded as
the simplest kinds of firing structure.
Firing Structures
The arrangement described by Harlan (1982)
and Hoffman (1982: 7 - 14) at Hierakonpolis,
locality 11C, may represent a development
from simple open firing. Dated c. 3200 - 3100
BCE, the structure is a pit in the ground that
seems to have contained fuel, while the
vessels to be fired stood on “dog-biscuit
shaped blocks,” 150 – 250 mm high. The
excavators describe this as a simple updraft
kiln, because the vessels were raised from the
fire on the “dog biscuit” blocks. Although
technically correct in that the draft (hot gases)
moved upward, it is preferable to regard such
arrangements as firing structures to avoid
confusion with true updraft kilns.
A further development, and one providing
greater protection to the vessels than the
arrangement from Hierakonpolis, is the
structure known, rather misleadingly, as the
“box oven,” a step between open firing and
the true updraft kiln. The box oven is
essentially a containing wall within which pots
are stacked. The fire may be within the wall
or, as in the Amarna example described
below, outside it and drawn in through an
opening at the bottom of the wall. In a true
updraft kiln, on the other hand, the fire is
located beneath the stack of vessels and is
separated from them by a perforated floor
(Nicholson 1989). Box ovens are known from
at least as early as the Middle Kingdom, at
sites such as Mirgissa, and from the New
Kingdom at el-Amarna, where an example has
been excavated containing its charge of
vessels (fig. 1; Kemp 1987: 73 - 76). Holthoer
(1977: 16) regarded the Mirgissa structure as a
bread oven, and it is indeed possible that the
same structure served the dual function of
breadmold-firing and subsequent bread-
baking. It has been shown experimentally that
the Amarna kiln/oven could have been used
to fire the vessels found within it (fig. 2;
Nicholson 1989), and this would certainly
have been a more fuel-efficient way of firing
the pots than open firing.
Updraft Kilns for Pottery, Faience, and Glass
“True” kilns can be divided into two main
types, updraft and downdraft, the distinction
between them being whether the hot gases
pass upward or downward through the stack
of vessels being fired (Hodges 1981). The
updraft kiln is by far the most common
historically. In this type of kiln (fig. 3) the fire
is in the lowermost part of the kiln, known as
the fire box or fire pit, and is separated from
the vessel stack by a perforated floor or
“chequer,” through which the hot gases travel
up into the firing chamber where the vessels
are stacked. Vessels are commonly inverted in
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 3
Figure 1. Box oven excavated at Chapel 556 of the
workmen’s village at el-Amarna.
Figure 2. Experimental firing of reconstruction of
box oven found at Chapel 556 of the workmen’s
village, el-Amarna. Note that the fire is outside the
structure, which draws in the flame to fire the
vessels.
the stack so that each becomes filled with the
hot gases, thereby slowing the upward passage
of the gases through the structure (fig. 4;
Nicholson and Patterson 1989). This has the
effect of increasing the efficiency of the firing,
consuming less fuel to achieve the desired
result. This is particularly important since it is
common for Egyptian updraft kilns to be
open at the top, rather than enclosed by a
dome. Vessels stacked in such open-topped
structures, at least as observed in modern
Egypt, are usually given a covering of sherds
(figs. 5 and 6). The sherd layer acts as a
collecting point for soot from the firing, so
that the vessels themselves are not blackened
by the fuel. It also serves to give a minimal
amount of insulation to the stack. The last
phase of a firing is often to throw dry
vegetation onto the covering of sherds, where
it ignites and removes much of the buildup of
carbon.
The expansion of vessels tightly packed in a
kiln puts considerable stress on the kiln walls,
which are usually made of mud-brick that
becomes fired brick in situ over time. It is
likely that the walls were reinforced in some
way, probably by tying large ropes around
them in order to prolong their lives (fig. 7).
Several tomb scenes show kilns with what
appear to be reinforcement bindings around
them. This practice of binding the kiln, albeit
with iron chains, wire belts, or metal bands
rather than ropes, remained common in the
European pottery industry into the twentieth
century. Such features are clearly
demonstrated on the so called “bottle kilns”
at Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom.
It is these updraft kilns that are commonly
depicted in tomb scenes, particularly from the
Middle and New Kingdoms (conveniently
summarized by Holthoer 1977: fig. 50)
although Old Kingdom examples are known,
such as those in the tomb of Ty at Saqqara
(Épron et al. 1939: pl. 71). Due to the
conventions of Egyptian art, it is difficult to
determine the scale of these structures, but it
is evident from scenes depicting them being
unloaded (for example, those at Beni Hasan)
that they stood taller than a man and
sometimes needed a step or bench at the
bottom in order that they could be reached
into. Determining the diameter of such
structures is more difficult, and there are no
known scenes showing a kiln being loaded or
unloaded from the inside, as is often the case
with present-day Egyptian kilns (see
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 4
Nicholson 1995b; Nicholson and Patterson
1989).
Fortunately, we are not solely dependent
upon depictions of pottery kilns: there are
numerous extant examples from Egypt from
several periods, including the Old Kingdom at
Elephantine (Kaiser et al. 1982) and the First
Figure 3. Section drawing of updraft kiln at Deir el-Gharbi, Upper Egypt. Fire box is beneath a perforated
floor through which the heat passes (see arrows). Above floor are stacked rows of vessels. The letter “n” =
number of vessels per row; “w” = number of vessels wasted in firing. Vessel color changes according to
position in kiln.
Intermediate Period at Ayn Asil (Balat)
(Soukiassian et al. 1990). The excavation at
the latter site gives a good impression of the
spatial organization of a First Intermediate
Period workshop, including tall, tower-like
kilns quite wide enough to have
accommodated a person during stacking and
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 5
Figure 4. Stacking vessels into a kiln at Deir el-
Gharbi. Note that the vessels are inverted so as to
contain the hot gases passing up through the
perforated floor.
Figure 5. Covering the open top of a kiln at Deir
el-Gharbi with sherds. These provide a degree of
insulation and also serve to collect soot so that the
finished vessels are not blackened.
unloading. The excavators grouped the kilns
into several types, largely depending on how
the perforated floor, or chequer, was
supported. In types 1 through 3 the chequer
rested on walls or pillars, while in types 4 and
5 it was supported on projections around the
wall, rather than extending onto a support at
or near the center of the structure.
All the contemporary Egyptian pottery kilns
with which the writer is familiar have the
perforated floor springing as a low vault from
ground-level projections around the side, as
seen in Balat types 4 and 5, or from
projections higher up the walls. This
arrangement leaves the fire box free of
obstruction and makes fueling and raking
easier. It is the arrangement that appears to
have been used in the several known New
Kingdom kilns from el-Amarna. The first of
Figure 6. A firing at Deir el-Gharbi. The kiln is
covered only by a layer of sherds and has no afixed
dome. Note that the structure is built into a
mound for insulation.
these was discovered by Borchardt (1933),
who believed it to be a bread oven. This
structure, in house P47.20, was re-excavated
in the 1990s (Nicholson 1995a) and found to
be a pottery kiln similar to several others at
the site.
Archaeologically, kilns may show evidence
of vitrification, since the mud-brick with
which they are constructed—often of the
same Nile clay as the pots themselves—is
fired over and over again. This vitrification is
commonly referred to as “slag” by
archaeologists as a convenient shorthand, a
term that sometimes leads to the belief that
the kilns were actually employed for
metallurgy (or less correctly glass production,
since slag is specific to metallurgy). In fact the
substance in question is not true slag (see
Bachmann 1982) and is not encountered in all
kilns. Because much Pharaonic pottery is fired
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 6
Figure 7. An experimental pottery kiln built at el-
Amarna and reinforced with rope bindings to help
counter the expansion caused by the pottery
charge.
at temperatures of 800°C or less it is quite
common for the walls of kilns simply to be
reddened rather than vitrified. By the same
token kiln sites should not be expected to
feature “wasters” (overfired vessels):
underfiring was almost certainly a more
common fault than overfiring.
One of the reasons for the buildup of so-
called slag can be the reaction between the
“fly ash” (literally, particles of ash moved up
through the structure by the hot gases) and
the kiln wall. The silica from ash, along with
alkalis contained in it, act to make up the
siliceous slag, essentially a layer of glass or
glaze on the kiln wall. Fly ash is undesirable,
particularly during the firing of vessels with a
decorated surface or of glazed wares (such
glazed pottery is known in Egypt from
Roman times onward).
One way of obviating the problem of fly ash
is to use a downdraft kiln. These were not
common in antiquity, however, and the
difficulty was more usually solved by the use
of “saggars.” Saggars were ceramic containers,
stacked one on top of the other, in which
pottery whose surface might be damaged by
fly ash, or blackened by soot from smoke, was
fired. In essence each saggar acted as a
miniature, closed kiln (see Brown 1976: 86 -
87). An alternative was to channel the hot
gases through vertical pipes between which
the vessels were stacked. This arrangement is
known from Europe during the Roman
Period, and although not yet known from
Egypt, it would not be surprising to find it
there (Brown 1976: 84 - 85).
It is worth repeating here that the top
temperature for an uncovered updraft kiln is
c. 1000°C. The addition of a dome, which
serves to reflect heat back into the structure as
well as to contain it, can yield temperatures of
1150°C. Beyond this the Nile silt clay rapidly
vitrifies and begins to collapse. Mud-bricks
and pottery are essentially of the same
material and are thus subject to the same
considerations when heated. Where kilns
show evidence for a dome, one should
consider the possibility that they were glass or
metal furnaces rather than pottery kilns,
although domed pottery kilns are documented
from the ancient world. It has been suggested
from the raw materials found in their
association that the large kilns or furnaces
discovered at el-Amarna, and which show
signs of a dome, were intended for the making
of glass.
Downdraft Kilns
The downdraft kiln is not known from
Pharaonic Egypt and is mentioned here only
in passing. In this type of kiln the hot gases
usually pass over a baffle wall of some kind
before being drawn down through the stack
of vessels and leaving the kiln via a chimney at
the rear of the structure, the chimney acting as
the means by which the gases are drawn (see
Hodges 1981: 35 - 41). The firing chamber of
such a kiln is enclosed—usually by a dome.
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 7
Figure 8. Firing of reconstruction of the glass
furnace found at el-Amarna site O45.1. The
domed superstructure helps to retain and reflect
heat.
The advantage of such a structure is that the
heat remains within the kiln longer and there
is less chance of discoloration of the vessels as
a result of smoke or ash. The downdraft kiln
is also capable of reaching temperatures of up
to c. 1300°C, whereas the maximum for an
uncovered updraft kiln is c. 1000°C. If a dome
is added to an updraft kiln, then temperatures
of up to c. 1150°C may be achieved, since the
dome helps to retain heat as well as reflect it
downwards.
Faience Kilns
Faience kilns are sometimes referred to as
furnaces by archaeologists, because it is
assumed that they operated at very high
temperatures, and also perhaps because in
Roman times they could be very large. In fact
the temperatures necessary for firing faience
were usually well within the temperature range
of terracotta firing (maximum 1000°C).
Pharaonic faience was fired in numerous
ways—many of them akin to the methods
used to produce pottery. At Abydos, for
example, there is evidence for the open firing
of faience during the Old Kingdom and First
Intermediate Period, as well as for a possible
kiln or firing structure (see Nicholson and
Peltenburg 2000: 180 - 181). There is also a
possible kiln from Lisht, where a faience-
making area was identified.
Much more evidence for faience production
is available for the New Kingdom, not least
from el-Amarna (Petrie 1894); however, there
is some uncertainty about the kilns
themselves. Nicholson (2007) has identified
possible faience kilns at el-Amarna site O45.1,
but these are of the same design as pottery
kilns and their attribution to faience remains
tentative. Since they occur at a locality where
faience as well as pottery is known to have
been made, and since both faience and pottery
kilns would have operated within the same
temperature ranges, they cannot definitely be
ascribed to the faience-making operation. It
would not be surprising to find that pottery
and faience were sometimes fired in the same
kilns, albeit not at the same time, since
different temperatures might have been
required and/or because saggars might have
been needed for the faience. The excavators at
el-Amarna also found large updraft kilns at
O45.1, which they believe were used for firing
glass (fig. 8). These structures, too, could have
served for faience production, fired to a lower
temperature than that required for the
reacting together and subsequent melting of
glass.
At least some of the faience may well have
been fired in saggars (see above) during the
New Kingdom and later, and these are very
well attested from the Roman Period at the
site of Kom Helul, Memphis (Petrie 1909,
1911). Here Petrie recorded very substantial
rectangular kilns, sunk up to c. 5 m into the
ground. These are currently being
reinvestigated.
Lime Kilns
Kilns for the reduction of limestone to lime
for use either as mortar or for agriculture are
not securely attested from Pharaonic Egypt.
James Harrell (personal communication:
January 2010) notes that the use of lime
plaster is not certainly recorded before the
Ptolemaic era; consequently the occurrence of
lime kilns cannot be expected before that
date. Lime kilns differ from kilns for firing
pottery or faience in that they did not bind
material together, but rather reduced it to a
friable state. Henein (2002), however, records
the use of a combined pottery and lime kiln in
Kilns and Firing Structures, Nicholson, UEE 2010 8
Dakhla Oasis, though this appears to be a
very localized practice introduced in Islamic
times and requiring further study. Because of
their specialized nature, lime kilns do not
normally feature in accounts of kiln
technology.
Bibliographic Notes
Publications dealing specifically with Egyptian kilns are few, and the literature scattered. Although
dated and generalized in its approach, Henry Hodges’ classic work, Artifacts (1981), remains a
valuable starting point for understanding the topic, while Rice (1987) gives a good overview of
kilns and their use in ceramic manufacture. Nicholson (1993) summarizes what was known of
Egyptian pottery kilns up to that date and draws on pioneering work by Arnold (1976, 1986). The
publication of recent work at el-Amarna (Nicholson 2007) covers the construction of pottery,
faience, and glass kilns/furnaces at that site. The Roman faience furnaces at Kom Helul,
Memphis, are currently being re-investigated, but Petrie’s publications (1909, 1911) give some
indication of their scale. Work on kilns and furnaces in Egypt is still relatively rare; much remains
to be done.