CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF LU

The hereditary house of the state of Lu looms large in the historical
consciousness of ancient China, indeed much larger than its relatively limited
geographical extent and military power ever warranted. This prestige derives
primarily from two features of its history. First, it was founded, at least
nominally, by the Duke of Zhou (d. c. 1032), son of King Wen of Zhou
(r. 1099/1056–1050) and younger brother of King Wu of Zhou (r. 1049/1045–
1043), and—for a time—apparently regent for King Wus young son, King
Cheng of Zhou (r. 1042/1035–1006). Although the Duke of Zhou did not
actually take up rule in Lu, which is located in the southwestern part of
present-day Shandong province, far to the east of the Zhou capital in the Wei
River valley of what is today Shaanxi province, he was always looked back
upon as the high ancestor of the state. A second reason for the prominence of
Lu is that it was the state where Confucius (–) lived most of his life, and
where he was supposed to have put into nal form the Springs and Autumns
(Chunqiu), an annalistic historical account of the state from until .
The establishment of Lu, as in the case of almost all the colonies in the
eastern part of the Zhou realm, was intimately connected with the Wu Geng
rebellion shortly after the Zhou conquest of Shang. When King Wu died just
two years after the conquest, the Duke of Zhou, who was in residence in the
Zhou capital, announced that he would be in charge of the government in
place of King Cheng, who is often described as being still in diapers. The
Duke of Zhou was the fourth of ten sons of King Wen and his principal
consort Tai Si. The eldest son, Bo Yi Kao, had died prior to the conquest.
Then came Fa, better known as King Wu. After King Wu, the third son was
Guanshu Xian; the fourth Dan, the Duke of Zhou; fth, Caishu Du; and so
on through the youngest Danji Zai. The reason that the Duke of Zhou was in
the capital, but not his elder brother Guanshu Xian is because Xian, together
with the fth son Caishu Du, had been sent to the former Shang capital to
oversee the Shang people there. When they learned that the Duke of Zhou
had taken command of the Zhou government, they naturally treated it as a

Hereditary Houses

sort of coup detat, and so joined together with Wu Geng, the son of the last
king of Shang, Di Xin (r. 1086–1045), to rebel against this act. The Duke of
Zhou in concert with King Cheng and the Duke of Shao then launched a
second conquest campaign, according to most traditions killing Wu Geng
and Guanshu Xian and sending Caishu Du into exile. According to the
standard historical tradition, the Duke of Zhou then continued in charge of
the government for several years before eventually returning command to
King Cheng, when he had become old enough to rule.
The Wu Geng rebellion certainly did take place; there is a bronze vessel
cast for the Grand Protector (Tai Bao), the Duke of Shao, that commemorates
his role in suppressing this rebellion. Interestingly, the inscription does not
mention the Duke of Zhou, but gives credit to the king The king attacked
Luzi Sheng (i.e., Wu Geng) and suppressed his rebellion. Much of the rest of
the story concerning the Duke of Zhou almost certainly did not take place,
at least not in the way that the standard story suggests. He may well have
precipitated the rebellion by seizing control of the government, but it was
not just his brothers Guanshu Xian and Caishu Du who resented this. There
are strong hints throughout the historical tradition that King Cheng also
resented this usurpation, as did, most probably, the Duke of Shao, who was
the kings protector in fact as well as in title. There are other hints, or even
explicit statements, that when the Duke of Zhou returned power to the king,
he himself went into a sort of exile. It seems likely that this exile was in the
area of Lu. There is another bronze vessel, known as the Ran fangding, from
this same period that is currently in the collection of the Asian Art Museum
of San Francisco and that describes the Duke of Zhou as leading an attack
against three dierent eastern peoples.

It was when the Duke of Zhou was on campaign attacking the Eastern
Peoples, the Elder of Feng, and Pugu, all of which he destroyed. The
duke returned and sacriced a bird in the Zhou temple. On wuchen
(day ), he drank Qin-spirits. The duke awarded one hundred strands
of cowries to Ran, who herewith makes this precious caldron.

The Eastern Peoples lived throughout the southern part of modern Shandong
province as well as western Jiangsu and northern Anhui; they had been a
nemesis even to the former Shang state, and would continue to be a threat to
the Zhou kings for the remainder of the Western Zhou period. Feng and
Pugu can be located with more certainty. They were both located very near
to where the capital of Lu was located: at modern Qufu, Shandong. There is


Lu

another bronze vessel that doubtless also derives from this same military
campaign, this time against yet another polity in the same area: Gai. The
inscription is not lengthy, but it is important because it mentions both the
Duke of Zhou and a person named Qin, which was the name of his son who
is supposed to have become the rst lord of Lu.

The king attacked the Lord of Gai. The Duke of Zhou conspired with
Qin to pray. Qin oered esh in praying. The king awarded (him)
bronze, one hundred measures; Qin herewith makes this treasured
vessel.

Qin went to Lu to become the rst lord of the state, and is said to have
ruled there for forty-six years. According to one account, it was three years
after taking up his post before he returned to the Zhou capital to report.
When asked why he was so slow, he said that it had taken that long to make
the local inhabitants conform to Zhou ways. In fact, from archaeological
excavations conducted at Qufu, Shandong in the 1960s and 1970s, it is clear
that the area in which Lu was located had long been inhabited; evidence
from graves in and near Qufu suggests that the city was distinctly segregated,
with an underclass buried according to Shang burial practices and furnished
only with pottery vessels, and a ruling class buried according to Zhou
practices furnished with bronze vessels. Over time, however, Zhou practices
prevailed. The contours of the city walls could be reconstructed, suggesting
that the city came closest of all ancient cities to the classical standards
outlined in the later ritual classics.
The history of the state of Lu is also the most fully recorded among all of
the states of the time, with the names and lengths of reign of each of the
lords of the state recorded throughout the Western Zhou period. However,
until the time of King Xuan of Zhou (r. –), these records do not
indicate anything more than who succeeded who; sometimes succession
passed from father to son, sometimes from elder brother to younger brother,
without any apparent standard. At the very beginning of King Xuans reign,
Duke Wu of Lu (r. –) succeeded his elder brother, Duke Zhen (r. –
). In the spring of of , the already aged Duke Wu together with his
sons Kuo and Xi went to the Zhou capital to pay their respects to the king.
King Xuan became smitten with the younger son Xi and ordered that he be
named Duke Wus heir apparent. Despite remonstrations at court against
this breach of precedent, when Duke Wu died that same year, King Xuan did
appoint Xi as lord, to be known as Duke Yi (r. –). King Xuans

Hereditary Houses

ministers argued that the kings intrusion into the normal succession of the
state would surely bring about turmoil. They were right about that. Nine
years later, Bo Yu, the son of the elder brother Kuo, together with the people
of the state assassinated Duke Yi. This prompted King Xuan to invade the
state to overthrow Bo Yu, installing yet another younger brother of Duke Yi
as the new lord of the state. Records of the Historian states laconically that
from this time on, the many lords rebelled against the kings commands.
The century or so after the time of King Xuan, and particularly the half
century after his son King You (r. –) was killed, bringing the Western
Zhou period to an end, are something of a dark age in the history of ancient
China. Records resume in , with the Springs and Autumns of Lu and its
complement Zuo Tradition, which narrate the history of the state of Lu—
year by year—for the next years (or years in the case of the Zuo
Tradition). The Springs and Autumns is a sparse annalistic record, noting
events in the state, and often in other states as well, especially when they
impinged on the aairs of Lu. The Zuo Tradition is a much fuller historical
accounting, especially for the second half of the period, providing
considerable context for the events of the time. In addition to its unique
value as a historical source, the Zuo Tradition is generally regarded as one of
the masterpieces of the Chinese literary tradition. So important are the
Springs and Autumns and Zuo Tradition for the history of this period that
dates within the period are generally given according to the twelve rulers of
Lu, and no longer by the Zhou kings. One thing to note, however, is that
although these rulers are routinely referred to in these sources as dukes
(gong), and it is routine to refer to them as such, and I will do so here as well,
in fact duke is a posthumous appellation referring to any deceased ruler;
during their lives, the rulers of Lu had the title of lord (hou). The only
rulers of the time who had the title of duke during their lives were those of
the small state of Song, ruled by descendants of the kings of the former
Shang dynasty.
Both the Springs and Autumns and Zuo Tradition begin in with the
rst year of Duke Yin. As was the case a century before, his succession was
irregular. Duke Yin was the son of a secondary consort, and ruled as a regent
for a younger brother, the future Duke Huan (r. –). Given the
confusion of having two dierent lords alive at the same time, there was a
plot to do away with the younger brother. When Duke Yin refused to join the
conspiracy, he was assassinated himself, making way for Duke Huan. Just as
Duke Huans reign began with a murder, so too did it end with his own
murder. He was killed while accompanying his wife, Wen Jiang, on a visit to


Lu

the neighboring state of Qi, her natal state. While there, she had an aair
with her own brother, Duke Xiang of Qi (–). When Duke Huan
objected to her behavior, she told her brother, who had Duke Huan murdered.
This would not be the last such episode among the rulers of these two
neighboring states.
Duke Huan was succeeded by his son Duke Zhuang (r. –), whose
reign coincided with the beginning of the reign of the great Duke Huan of
Qi (r. –). Duke Huan of Qi was acknowledged as the rst of the
premiers (ba) of the Springs and Autumns period, and Lu too was able to
benet from the period of peace and stability that he brought about.
Nevertheless, despite Duke Zhuangs own relatively successful reign, the
reign did not end well, with the succession once again problematic. On his
deathbed, he asked two of his brothers for advice as to who should succeed
him. One brother, by a dierent mother, Prince Ya, recommended his own
full brother Prince Qingfu, while another brother, Prince You, recommended
Duke Zhuangs son Ziban. In the course of this debate, Prince You killed
Prince Ya, while Prince Qingfu arranged for the murder of Ziban. Prince You
rst ed the state, together with another of Duke Zhuangs sons, the future
Duke Min (r. –), but then returned to have Duke Min installed as
ruler. His reign did not last long, as he was soon murdered by Prince Qingfu,
who, however, was then forced to ee in exile himself. The last man standing
was yet another son of Duke Zhuang, who was installed as Duke Xi (r. –
). While Duke Xi did manage to have a lengthy reign of thirty-three
years, and even to die a natural death, his reign saw the nal decline in the
power of the actual rulers of Lu. The houses of the three princes most
intimately involved in the succession struggle after the death of Duke
Zhuang came increasingly to dominate the aairs of state. The houses are
usually referred to as the grandson (sun) lineages, dierentiated by order of
birth: the Zhongsun lineage (also known as the Meng lineage) deriving from
Prince Qingfu, the Shusun (or Shu) lineage from Prince Ya, and the Jisun (or
Ji) lineage from Prince You.
Duke Xi was followed by lords Wen (r. –), Xuan (r. –),
Cheng (r. –) and Xiang (r. –). By the time that Duke Xiang
succeeded, at the tender age of four years old, most real power was in the
hands of the the three grandson houses, and especially that of the Jisun
lineage under the long-lived Ji Wenzi (c. –). Under Ji Wenzis son, Ji
Wuzi (d. ), the Lu army was reorganized into three divisions, one each
under each of the three houses, such that Duke Xiang was left without any
power at all. While the tales of sex, lies and power in the Zuo Traditions

Hereditary Houses

account of the domestic aairs in Lu are always entertaining, and the
behavior of the three houses has long been studied in China for how to
behave—or, more often, how not to behave—aairs in Lu were of little
import in the greater world of Zhou China. Even the Zuo Tradition seems
more concerned during this hundred-year period with the rise of the state of
Jin and its competition with the southern state of Chu.
By the beginning of Duke Zhaos reign (r. –), Jin had lost its
preeminence in the lower Yellow River valley to Chu, though by the end of
that lengthy reign Chu had already squandered its power and was in the
course of being replaced—at least temporarily—by its newly arising eastern
neighbor Wu. Within Lu itself, when Duke Zhao attempted to challenge the
three grandson lineages, they joined together to drive him into exile. Their
cooperation did not last long, as they soon reverted to ghting among
themselves.
The story of Duke Zhaos exile, which occurred in , is said to have
been foretold by the appearance earlier in that year of a type of mynah bird
or grackle that had never before been seen in northern China. This omen
recalled to the music master a childrens song that had been popular about a
century earlier. As shown by the translation of James Legge (1815–1897), the
Scottish missionary who contributed so much to our understanding of
ancient China through his translations of the Confucian classics, the
movements of the grackles were correlated with the movement of Duke
Zhao.

Here are grackles apace! The duke ies in disgrace.
Look at the grackles wings! To the wilds the duke ings, A horse one
to him brings.
Look how the grackles go! In Kan-how he is low, Wants coat and
trousers now.
Behold the grackles nest! Far o the duke doth rest. Chow-fu has lost
his state, Sung-foo comes proud and great.
O the grackles so strange! The songs to weeping change.

The Zuo Tradition account of Lord Zhaos reign is replete with other such
stories, providing a rich tapestry of sixth-century BCE Chinese cultural
history, a particularly important time since it largely coincides with the life
of Confucius (–). The rst mention of Confucius comes in the
seventh year of Duke Zhao (), though it anticipates an event that would
take place seventeen years later. In , while on a diplomatic visit in the


Lu

state of Zheng, Meng Xizi, the head of the senior Zhongsun lineage,
embarrassed himself by bungling matters of ritual and state protocol. Upon
his return to Lu, he set about looking for a teacher of ritual. In , on his
deathbed, he decreed that his sons Yue, better known as Meng Yizi, and Heji
(Nangong Jingshu) should become students of Confucius. To this, Confucius
is said to have said:

One who is able to correct his mistakes is a gentleman. The Poetry says:
A gentleman can serve as a standard, as a model. Meng Xizi can be a
standard, a model, to be sure!

As Confucius became older, he is quoted more and more often in the Zuo
Tradition, often oering evaluations of statesmen in other states, such as Zi
Chan of Zheng (d. ), or criticizing Shu Xiang of Jin (d. ) for casting
the law-code of state on the side of an iron caldron, predicting that it would
cause the people to become litigious.
The nal two lords included in the Springs and Autumns and Zuo
Tradition are Duke Ding (r. –) and Duke Ai (r. –). Unlike the
Zuo Traditions fulsome descriptions of events during the reign of Duke
Zhao, its coverage of these two reigns is quite spare, often simply noting a
military campaign here or there. However, there were many military
campaigns to be noted. As the two major powers of the preceding century,
Jin and Chu, lost their power, warfare became even more frequent, setting
the scene for the onset of what is usually referred to as the Warring States
period. Toward the end of his reign, Duke Ai, like Duke Zhao before him,
was forced into exile by the three lineages, though he was eventually able to
return home. He was followed by nine further lords of state, who persisted
for over two hundred years, about which very little is known; it is obvious
that Lu was but a pawn in the chess match among the seven great powers of
the day. Finally, in , it was annihilated. Unlike the other states of the time
that were exterminated by the western state of Qin, Lu was brought to an end
by the southern state of Chu. But for Lu the result was the same. As Sima
Qian (–) said in concluding his account of the state: Its rituals of
bowing and yielding are worth following, but oh how perverse was its
conduct of aairs!