CHAPTER
BASIC ANNALS OF SHANG

The Basic Annals of Xia chapter above already alluded to the defeat of
Jie, the last ruler of Xia, by Tang, the ruler of Shang, and also to the incursion
of the Erligang Culture into the sphere of the earlier Erlitou Culture. Both of
these developments, thought to have taken place in the middle of the
sixteenth century, are seen to herald the beginning of the Shang dynasty.
Whereas, the historicity of the Xia dynasty is still much debated, with the
Shang dynasty—at least the last portion of the dynasty—we fully enter into
the historical period, by which we mean that there are contemporary written
records attesting to its existence. These records, in the form of inscriptions
on ritual bronze vessels and especially records of divination inscribed into
the shells of turtles and the scapula bones of oxen, are the earliest examples
of writing in China. Although specialized study is required to be able to read
these inscriptions, they are recognizably ancestral to Chinese writing still in
use today, making it the worlds longest lasting script still in continuous use.
Legendary histories of the Shang begin well before the time of Tang.
According to the poem Dusky Bird in the Hymns of Shang section of the
Classic of Poetry, Heaven commanded a dusky bird, often identied as a raven
or a swallow, to descend and give birth to the Shang people. More developed
myths say that a woman named Jiandi swallowed the birds egg and became
pregnant. Jiandi is supposed to have been a secondary wife of Thearch Ku, a
great grandson of the Yellow Thearch. The child born to her was a son: Xie.
When Xie was grown, he gained merit by assisting Yu the Great in controlling
the ood waters, and so was appointed by Shun to rule over the area of Shang,
located in the eastern part of present-day Henan province. Thus began a long-
time totem association between the Shang people and birds.
Records of the Historian continues the Shang genealogy through thirteen
generations, before coming nally to Tang, known also as Cheng Tang (the
Completing Tang) or by his temple name Tian Yi or Tai Yi. The Yi of this
Tian Yi or Tai Yi is the second of the ten Heavenly Stems, names associated
with ten suns that produced the ten days of the Shang week. Thereafter, all

Basic Annals

Shang kings would be known posthumously by one of these ten names,
usually prefaced by an adjective to dierentiate them from others with the
same name, and would receive sacricial oerings on that particular day of
the week. By the end of the dynasty, it would require thirty-six weeks to
complete a cycle of ve dierent sacrices to all of the deceased kings and
also their primary consorts; since this sacricial cycle approximated one
solar year, the word for sacrice came to be used to designate the year
as well.
Tang lived at the same time as Jie, the paradigmatically evil last ruler of
the Xia dynasty. Like Yao and Shun in the period before the Xia dynasty had
been established, Tang was assisted by a particularly virtuous minister, Yi
Yin, who served as an intermediary between the Shang and Xia. However,
when Jie proved to be recalcitrant, Tang and the Shang attacked him and
forced him into exile. According to the orthodox Chinese historical tradition,
there could only be one legitimate ruler at a time, but there had to be a ruler.
Jies defeat constituted the end of the Xia and the beginning of the Shang
dynasty.
Tang was succeeded in turn by twenty-nine rulers. Unlike many later
dynasties, especially the Zhou, which practiced father-son succession, royal
succession in the Shang often passed from elder brother to younger brother
before eventually moving on to the next generation. This was true of the
generation following that of Tang, rule moving from Wai Bing to Zhong Ren.
With the death of Zhong Ren, Yi Yin, still alive and now very much the
power behind the throne (though it is worth noting that there were no
thrones in ancient China; chairs came to China from India along with
Buddhism some fteen hundred years after this time), intervened to ensure
succession to Tangs eldest grandson, Tai Jia. Unfortunately, according to
later legends, at rst Tai Jia proved unt to rule, so Yi Yin intervened again
and exiled him (or, rather, imprisoned him) to the Paulownia Palace for
three years. According to the legends, after these three years, Tai Jia reformed
his behavior and, after being reinstated by Yi Yin, went on to be one of the
great Shang rulers. This three-year exile at the beginning of his reign is
probably an early manifestation of the later custom of observing a three-
year mourning period when the ruler, or ones own father, passed away, and
may also be tied to ministers acting on behalf of the king-in-waiting during
this period. Whatever the validity of this observation, it is certainly the case
that by the Warring States period Yi Yin would take his place at the head of
the pantheon of virtuous ministers that was held up as a counterweight to
royal power.


Shang

According to traditional sources, after the time of Tai Jia, another nine
generations passed, with brothers often contending for power. During this
time, rulers frequently moved their capitals across the ood plain of the
Yellow River, sometimes settling to the north of the river and sometimes to
its south. The tenth generation was ruled successively by four separate
brothers: Yang Jia, Pan Geng, Xiao Xin, and Xiao Yi. A tradition canonized by
inclusion in the Exalted Scriptures holds that Pan Geng moved the capital yet
again, giving a speech to urge the people to relocate to the south of the Yellow
River; this speech is recorded as the Pan Geng chapter, regarded by many
as the earliest reliable text in the Exalted Scriptures. Since by the time of Pan
Geng, there has yet to be found any contemporary evidence of writing, this
view of the date of the Pan Geng chapter is questionable. What is more,
there is good evidence that the Shang capital at about this time was located
well to the north of the Yellow River, and not to its south, though there is
some uncertainty as to the location of the Yellow River at this time; when it
empties into the North China Plain, it has frequently changed course, there
being records of some twenty-six course changes just since BCE, with
the river sometimes owing into the sea to the north of the mountainous
Shandong peninsula and sometimes to its south. However, evidence suggests
that in the thirteenth century BCE, the Yellow River owed to the south of
Anyang, as it does also today.
Recent archaeological excavations seem to show that toward the middle
of the thirteenth century, there existed a major palace site just to the north
of the Huan River near present-day Anyang, Henan. It is likely that this site,
referred to as Huanbei Shang Cheng (the Shang City to the North of the
Huan River), was the capital of Pan Geng. This site lls an important interval
between two other archaeological cultures associated with the Shang
dynasty: the Erligang Culture, centered on the present-day city of Zhengzhou,
Henan, and the Yinxu or Anyang Culture, centered on the present-day city
of Anyang. Heretofore, although there were manifest similarities between
these two cultures, there also seemed to be a gap between the end of the
Erligang Culture and the beginning of the Yinxu Culture. It is now clear that
the Huanbei site was inhabited after the end of the Erligang period and
immediately preceded the move to the Yinxu site, which contemporary
written records show to have been the nal capital of the last nine Shang
kings. Since the Huanbei site prominently featured a palace structure, it
seems reasonable that it should have been the home of Pan Geng or one or
more of his three brothers who reigned as Shang kings.

Basic Annals

With the generation following that of the four brothers, Yang Jia, Pan
Geng, Xiao Xin, and Xiao Yi, we move nally into Chinas historical period
proper. This is the reign of Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189), the son of Xiao Yi.
Later historical sources credit it with being very lengthy, fty-nine years,
and with marking a resurgence in Shang power. There is reason to believe
that his reign was quite long-lasting, even if not the fty-nine years it is
credited with in traditional histories, stretching for a decade or more both
prior to and after 1200. There is also good reason to see it as marking a
dramatic growth in Shang power. Habitation of the Yinxu site, which is all
but synonymous with late Shang culture, began with this reign, or possibly
just before it. The rst phase of the Yinxu Culture shows a modest
continuation of Erligang Culture. But in what is known as Phase Two of this
culture, coinciding with the late period of Wu Dings reign and perhaps that
of his rst reigning son Zu Geng (c. 1188–1178), the material remains show
explosive growth, both in terms of quantity and quality. This is also the
period of the rst oracle-bone inscriptions, prayers incised into the shells of
turtles or the scapula bones of oxen that serve as Chinas earliest written
records.
As many as two hundred thousand pieces of oracle bone have now been
unearthed from the vicinity of the Yinxu site, which means literally Waste
of Yin (Yin being another name for the Shang). The site sits in a bend of
the Huan River just northwest of the modern city of Anyang, the northern-
most city of Henan province. It is strategically located toward the north end
of the north China plain, just to the east of the southern tip of the Taihang
Mountains, a mountain range that runs north-south from the west of
modern-day Beijing south almost to the Yellow River; it traditionally served
to divide China into two zones: Shandong (literally to the east of the
mountains, not to be equated with the province of the same name) and
Shanxi (literally to the west of the mountains, also not necessarily to be
equated with the province of the same name.
It was the discovery of oracle bones at the very end of the nineteenth
century CE that attracted attention to Yinxu, ushering modern archaeology
into China. Excavations have been ongoing there, almost without
interruption, for almost a hundred years now, and have revealed a
sophisticated bronze using culture. The oracle bones begin with Phase Two
of the Yinxu Culture and continue until the last of the Shang kings, Di Xin
(r. 1086–1045). However, far and away the greatest number of pieces, making
up more than half of the total, come from the reign of Wu Ding. Divinations
from his time concerned virtually every topic that might concern a king,


Shang

from the weather to the harvest, from military aairs to the birth-giving of
his numerous wives, and extending even to his own toothaches. A simple
example of harvest divinations reads:

Crack-making on bingchen (day of the -day cycle), (the diviner)
Que armed: We will receive millet harvest.
Crack-making on bingchen (day ), (the diviner) Que armed: We
will not expect to receive millet harvest. Fourth month.

As can be seen here, at this early period divinations were regularly presented
as positive-negative alternatives, although the Shang seem to have indicated
their preference by inserting the word to expect in the side that they did
not wish to happen.
Other prayers were for more specic actions, among which military
campaigns are a frequent topic. The following divination took place in the
rst half of the part of Wu Dings reign for which there are oracle-bone
inscriptions.

Crack-making on xinyou (day ), (the diviner) Que armed: In this
period, the king will ally with Wang Cheng to attack Xiawei, (for if he
does) he will receive aid in it.
Crack-making on xinyou (day ), (the diviner) Que armed: In this
period, the king ought not ally with Wang Cheng to attack Xiawei, (for
if he does) he will not expect to receive aid in it.

This divination came in the context of a major Shang expansion to the west
of the Taihang Mountains. It is likely that this expansion put the Shang in
contact with other advanced cultures to the north and further west of the
mountains, contact that may explain the dramatic innovations seen in the
Shang material culture of this time. These innovations include most notably
horse-drawn chariots and a new tradition of jade sculpting. Even bronze
casting, which the Shang had mastered from the beginning of the dynasty,
underwent explosive development.
These developments were on full display in the tomb of Consort Hao (Fu
Hao), one of the main consorts of Wu Ding. The excavation of the tomb in
1976 was one of the most sensational discoveries of that decade, often
regarded as the Golden Age of Chinese archaeology. Located in the very
middle of the Yinxu site, it is the only tomb associated with the royal family

Basic Annals

that has been found intact, the tombs of the kings on the other side of the
Huan River all having been looted in early antiquity. Already before the
discovery her tomb, Consort Hao was well known from the oracle-bone
inscriptions of Wu Dings reign, with divinations about her leading troops
into battle, as well as several births. Buried with her in her tomb were over
ritual bronze vessels as well as weapons, bells, and the four earliest
bronze mirrors ever found in China; jade objects, including some that
were probably a thousand years old or more already at the time of her burial;
bone objects; , cowrie shells (a form of wealth in ancient China); a
number of stone, pottery, and ivory pieces; as well as sixteen human oerings
buried in the ll above the tomb chamber. The statue of her erected outside
of the Yinxu Museum portraying her as an Amazonia warrior is certainly
fanciful, but the bronzes in the museum that were cast for her are
unquestionably masterpieces of design and casting technology.
The resurgence of Shang power under Wu Ding doubtless manifested
itself in ways other than just material culture. It is likely that an alliance of
local groups located across a broad swath of central China, what is now
southwestern Shanxi, all of northern Henan, much of western Shandong,
and at least southern Hebei provinces, acknowledged the Shang king as one
of, if not the most important powers of the time. By the time Wu Ding died,
about 1190, his eldest son, known posthumously as Xiao Ji (Filial Ji) or Zu Ji,
had already predeceased him. Therefore, the succession passed rst to one
younger brother, Zu Geng, and then to another: Zu Jia (r. c. 1177–1158).
Under Zu Geng, life seems to have continued very much as it had under Wu
Ding. Among the oracle-bone inscriptions of his reign there are records of
sacrices to Ding or Father Ding, but there is little else to dierentiate them
from the sorts of divinations performed for Wu Ding. However, the
succession of Zu Jia brought with it major structural changes in the ways
that divination was performed, so much so that Dong Zuobin (1895–1963),
one of the most important early scholars of oracle-bone inscriptions, termed
it the advent of a New School. The most obvious change was in the initiation
of systematic sacrices to the royal ancestors, but it is likely that there were
other changes as well. For instance, the range of topics subject to divination
became greatly narrowed, often to just the single positive prayer that In the
next ten-day week there will be no misfortune. This led another important
scholar of oracle-bone inscriptions, David N. Keightley (1932–2017), to
suggest that this was evidence of a paradoxical theological reversal: whereas
the wide-ranging divinations under Wu Ding and Zu Geng routinely
resulted in the king predicting trouble for the Shang state, under the New


Shang

School divination became radically optimistic, the prognostications of the
king being invariably Auspicious. Although Dong Zuobin thought that
these reforms of the New School were more or less short-lived, with it
alternating back and forth with the Old School, in fact more recent studies
of Shang history show that divination continued according to the New
School procedures until the very end of the dynasty, perhaps years later.
In addition to the narrowing of topics to be divined, it would seem that
there was also some narrowing of the areas in which the Shang could project
their power. Groups located to the west of the Taihang Mountains that had
been allied with Wu Ding now came to be referred to with the sux land
(fang), which in Shang usage indicated enemies. This seems to suggest that
the Shang realm withdrew back to the east of the Taihang Mountains, a
retrenchment that may have cut them o from the source of many of the
innovations that had marked Wu Dings reign. The next four or ve reigns
following Zu Gengs are unremarkable. The oracle-bone inscriptions conrm
that they continued the Shang tradition of passing power from elder brother
to younger brother, and later sources suggest that they were all quite short.
However, neither of these features characterize the last king of the Shang;
named Zhu and known posthumously as Di Xin (Di being the word
thearch), he has gone down in Chinese tradition as the second of the
paradigmatically evil last rulers.
Di Xin succeeded his father Di Yi (r. 1105–1087) probably in 1086, and
would go on to have a very lengthy reign, before nally being overthrown in
1045. Both contemporary oracle-bone inscriptions and later traditions suggest
that he ruled vigorously, at least at rst. In 1077–1076, he personally led what
seems to have been a nine-month long military campaign eastwards into the
Huai River valley of what is today southern Shandong and northern Anhui
provinces. The progress of this campaign can be followed by the divinations
that he regularly performed praying for its success. The following are just a few
of more than one hundred inscriptions that pertain to this campaign.

Jiawu (day thirty-one of the sixty-day cycle), the king made cracks and
armed: Making for me wine and my grain, I will march in alliance
with Xi of You to campaign against People Land, and the ancestral
altars above and below will give me aid in it, and will not inict defeat
or trouble. Reporting at the Great City Shang, there will be no harm in
the bones. The king prognosticated and said: Auspicious. In the
ninth month, meeting the hui-ritual to Shang Jia; it is the tenth ritual
cycle.

Basic Annals

Jiayin (day fty-one), the king made cracks at Bo and armed: Today
I will march to Hong, and there will be no disaster.
Yimao (day fty-two), the king made cracks at Hong and armed:
Today I will march to Li, and there will be no disaster.
Crack-making on guisi (day thirty), Huang armed: In the next ten-
day week the king will have no trouble. In the twelfth month, it was
when the king was campaigning against the People Land. At Zang.
Crack-making on guimao (day forty), Huang armed: In the next
ten-day week the king will have no trouble. In the rst month, it was
when the king was coming from campaigning against the People
Land, at Yong, the hamlet of Lord Xi of You.
Granted, the topics of the divinations are not particularly revealing, but they
show at least when the campaign began, and how the inscriptions can be
arranged one after the other. Importantly, the simple change in the last two
inscriptions indicating that the king was campaigning against the People
Land and the king was coming from campaigning against the People Land
indicates a turning point in the campaign. Other evidence suggests that the
Shang forces had just won a decisive victory, capturing and then executing
the leader of the People Land.
While Di Xin was campaigning in the east, there were renewed
developments to the west of the Shang domain. Even further west than the
area that Wu Ding had brought under control at the beginning of the
preceding century, a rival power called the Zhou was beginning to form
alliances of its own. Later sources portray Di Xin as haughtily neglecting the
Zhou threat, ruthlessly persecuting the people, and dismissing remonstrations
by his own kinsmen. Whatever the truth of these traditions, it is certain that
Zhou eventually did mount a successful campaign against Shang, defeating
the Shang army and killing Di Xin, thus bringing an end to the Shang
dynasty. This is often regarded as the single most decisive event in ancient
Chinese history, ushering in the years of the Zhou dynasty, the third of
ancient Chinas fabled Three Dynasties.