CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF QI

Located in the northern part of present-day Shandong province, between Lu
to the south and Yan to the north, the state of Qi was another of the hereditary
houses established shortly after the Zhou conquest of Shang. Like the state of
Lu and Yan, it too was one of the last independent states to be conquered by
Qin in its drive to unify the empire. However, unlike Lu and Yan, which
despite their moral or strategic value were always of more or less minor
political and economic importance, Qi would grow into the major power of
northeastern China, and for a period of time in the early seventh century
was recognized as the foremost of all the independent states. Also, unlike Lu
and Yan, which were founded by blood relations of the Zhou royal house, Qi
was founded by Jiang Ziya, also known as Shi (General) or L Shangfu,
though he is perhaps best known to history as Tai Gong Wang, the Grand
Duke Expected; his various names indicate that he was a member of the L
lineage of the Jiang family, one of the major families of Zhou China and one
that often intermarried with the royal family of Zhou.
According to legend, Tai Gong Wang was a butcher from the coastal area
of eastern China, living in obscurity after having been cast out, late in his life,
by his wife. Disgruntled with the immoral rule of Di Xin (r. 1086–1045), the
last king of the Shang dynasty, he traveled west to the area of Zhou. It is said
that he was shing in the Wei River, when Ji Chang, the pre-dynastic ruler of
the Zhou people better known as King Wen (r. 1099/1056–1050), who
himself was on a hunting expedition, encountered him there. Recognizing
him as a sage who would help Zhou win power, King Wen immediately
appointed him as Grand Duke, and gave him the name Wang Expected.
Although King Wen died before Zhou could overthrow the Shang, the Grand
Duke continued to serve Wens son, King Wu (r. 1049/1045–1043). King Wu
appointed him to lead the Zhou army, perhaps because as an easterner he
was thought to have inside knowledge of the Shang army and its tactics.
Zhou did win a decisive victory at the battle at Muye, bringing the Shang

Hereditary Houses

dynasty to an end. The poem Great Brightness of the Classic of Poetry
writes of his eagle-like role in this battle:

The legions of the Yin and Shang, Their joining was like a forest.
Arrayed upon the Shepherds Wild, It was our lords who were aroused.
God on High looked down upon you, There was no doubt in your
hearts.
The Shepherds Wild so vast, so vast,
Sandalwood carts gleaming, gleaming, And teams of four pounding
pounding.
It was the general Shangfu, The one who raised up eagle-like,
Chilling the heart of that King Wu, Spreading out to attack great
Shang,
Meeting the morning clear and bright.

It is impossible to say to what extent the Grand Duke was responsible for the
Zhou victory. Nevertheless, he has become enshrined as the patron saint of
generals, and numerous military manuals credit him as the author, though
this is certainly ctional. It is interesting that the most famous of these works
on the art of war, called the Six Quivers (Liu tao), was long suspected of
being a late forgery, but in 1972 a fragmentary copy was found in a tomb at
Yinqueshan, Linzi, Shandong, which is to say within the territory of the state
of Qi; this shows that the text is in fact quite ancient, even if not quite so
ancient as the Grand Duke.
The Zhou victory won and the new dynasty proclaimed, the rst person
that King Wu appointed to establish a new colony in the east, even before the
kings brothers, was none other than the Grand Duke Wang. His colony,
known as Qi, was to be at Yingqiu, just to the east of the present-day city of
Zibo, Shandong. Although Zibo is now quite far removed from the sea, at the
beginning of the Zhou dynasty, with the coastline much further to the west
than is currently the case, it would have been on or near the Bay of Bohai. As
such, it quickly became rich through seafood and salt. Because of this
strategic location, the initial establishment of the state here was not
uncontested, Qi having to ght o attacks from the native Eastern Peoples.
The Grand Duke Wang is said to have lived to be over one hundred years
old, though of course there is no way to know whether this is true or just part
of his legend. He was succeeded by his son L Ji, subsequently to be known
as Duke Ding of Qi, who is mentioned once in the Exalted Scriptures for
having returned to the royal court to participate in the installation of King


Qi

Kang as the third king of the Western Zhou. After the time of Duke Ding,
there is little information about the state for the next hundred years or more.
There are a few bronze inscriptions that record that Qi contributed troops to
various campaigns against the Eastern Peoples, but none of these is
mentioned in traditional sources. However, beginning in the middle of the
ninth century, the state seems to have lurched from one crisis to another.
First, the ruler of the small neighboring state of Ji is said to have slandered
Duke Ai of Qi to the Zhou king, King Yi (r. –), and King Yi ordered
Duke Ai to be boiled in a bronze caldron. Although this has the smell of
legend about it, there are bronze inscriptions from this time that suggest the
royal court did in fact move to involve itself in the internal aairs of Qi,
which apparently were quite complicated. Duke Ai was replaced by a younger
half-brother, Duke Hu, but Hu was in turn hated by another younger full-
brother of Duke Ai, who led his partisans against Duke Hu, killing him and
driving his followers into exile; this was Duke Xian. With this, a state of
divided allegiances persisted for several decades. Full-blown civil war broke
out again about . Duke Li (r. –) is described as cruel, prompting
the son of Duke Hu to return from exile to kill him, though this son of Duke
Hu was himself killed in the battle. With this, Qi once again largely passes
out of historical accounts for well over another century, though it must have
passed this time of relative obscurity by enriching itself.
Qi re-enters history early in the seventh century, with the succession to
power of Duke Huan (r. –), named Jiu. Duke Huans succession was
not at all auspicious. Records of the Historian says of his predecessor and
elder half-brother, Duke Xiang (–): Duke Xiang drunkenly killed
Duke Huan of Lu (r. –), raped his wife, killed and executed many
without reason, was lewd with the women, and many times cheated the great
ministers. Finally, Duke Xiang was assassinated in a palace coup, though the
assassin, by the name of Wuzhi, which means Ignorant, was also killed in
turn. Meanwhile, fearing that disaster would reach him as well, Jiu went into
exile at Lu, the natal home of his brother. There he was put under the care of
one Guan Zhong (c. –). With the assassination of Duke Xiang and the
death of Wuzhi, Jiu returned to Qi. His more than forty years of rule would
be one of the most illustrious reigns in all of Chinese history.
Once Duke Huan was in power, Guan Zhong is said to have organized the
state into a hierarchical administrative structure. The state was divided into
seven counties (xian), each of which was sub-divided into three districts
(xiang), thus making for twenty-one districts in all, with each district sub-
divided into ten marches (lian), each march into four villages (li), each of

Hereditary Houses

which contained ve groups of ten families. This structure was reected as
well in the organization of the Qi army: each group of ten families was
responsible for contributing ve soldiers, each village one chariot, each
march a legion of two hundred troops, and each district a regiment of two
thousand troops. Theoretically at least, the Qi army could put , men
and chariots into the eld, making it the largest and best organized army
of the time.
Meanwhile, the small states along the central course of the Yellow River
were being threatened by the newly rising southern state of Chu. Seeking the
protection of the larger and richer state of Qi to the north, these central
states—Song, Chen, Wi, Zheng, Xu, Cao, Cai, and Lu, as well as other still
smaller states—signed mutual defense treaties at a pair of interstate meetings
in and , guaranteed by Qi. The second of these meetings was attended
as well by a representative of the Zhou king, who conrmed the privileged
place of Duke Huan among all the lords, recognizing him as Premier (ba),
the rst among all the lords. Over the next almost forty years of his reign,
Duke Huan presided over ten more interstate meetings. Some of the
meetings were held for the express purposes of launching military campaigns,
others merely to discuss topics of mutual concern, and the various states
paid contributions to Qi for its leadership.
In , after forty years of serving Duke Huan, Guan Zhong died. Before
he died, Duke Huan asked for his advice as to which minister should succeed
him; Guan Zhong advised against all of the leading candidates. After his
death, Duke Huan nonetheless appointed three of the people Guan Zhong
advised against. This was but the rst of his mistakes, as they immediately set
up monopolizing power among them. Two years later, Duke Huan died in
his own turn, leaving behind a complicated family situation. He had three
principal consorts, but none of the three had given birth to an heir. He also
had six other consorts who he treated as if they were principal wives. Each
of these six consorts had given birth to sons. Duke Huan and Guan Zhong
had originally named Zhao, the son of a woman from the state of Zheng, to
be crown prince, but had sent him to Zhengs neighbor state Song for safe-
keeping. Back in Qi, another consort from the state of Wi and the palace
eunuchs convinced the dying duke to replace Zhao with her son Wugui. This
caused the ve sons still in the state to ght among themselves over the
succession, the dierent factions blocking access to the ducal palace. Duke
Huan died in the tenth month of , but with no one able to enter the
palace the body lay untouched for sixty-seven days; when he was nally
examined, maggots were crawling out of the body. And this was not the


Qi

worst of it. Wugui took his place as duke, but Duke Xiang of Song (r. –
), at the head of an army, escorted the original crown prince Zhao back
to Qi. Alarmed, the people of Qi put Wugui to death; his reign lasted all of
three months. But when Zhao was about to take power, the other four sons
attacked him, and he had to ee once again to Song. Song attacked again,
nally placing Zhao in power; he was known as Duke Xiao (r. –).
Duke Huan was nally buried in the eighth month of the year, some ten
months after he had died.
Qi would never recover from this fraternal succession battle. A century
later, the heirs of the Grand Duke Wang would lose power entirely. In ,
Tian Wuyu (also known as Chen Huanzi; . –), a descendant of the
lords of the south-central state of Chen, was appointed high minister; three
generations later, in , another member of the Tian family, Tian Heng
(also known as Chen Heng, Chen Chang and Tian Chengzi; . ),
murdered the heir apparent of Duke Dao (r. –). In , he murdered
the young puppet ruler Duke Jian (r. –) and took eective control of
the state himself. From this time on, the state was ruled by the Tian family,
rst in fact, and then by the end of the century in name also; the subsequent
period is usually referred to in histories as the Tian Qi, in contrast to the
earlier Jiang Qi. A story in the Zuo Tradition says that as early as this was
predicted by a divination using the Zhou Changes, better known in the West
as the Classic of Changes. It is not easy to understand all of the interpretations
of this divination, but the story provides some sense of the developing
philosophy around the Zhou Changes.

Duke Li of Chen was born of a woman from Cai. Therefore, men of
Cai killed Wufu and established Duke Li (as ruler). He fathered
Jingzhong. When (Jingzhong) was young, the Scribe of Zhou used the
Zhou Changes to have an audience with the Lord of Chen. The Lord of
Chen had him divine by milfoil (about Jingzhong), meeting Guan
Looking Up s Pi Negation, and said: This says:
Looking up at the kingdoms radiance. Benecial herewith to be
hosted by the king.
Will this one not come to replace Chens rulers? If not here, it will
be in a dierent state. If not by himself, it will be his descendants.
Radiance is distant and shines from something else. Kun is Earth,
Xun is the Wind, and Qian is Heaven. Wind becoming Heaven
above Earth is Mountain. Having the resources of a mountain, and
shining on it with heavenly radiance is to reside above Earth; therefore,

Hereditary Houses

it says, Looking up at the kingdoms radiance. Benecial herewith to
be hosted by the king. The courts goods are displayed by the hundreds,
presented with jades and silk. The beauties of heaven and earth are all
complete among them. Therefore, it says: Benecial herewith to be
hosted by the king. And yet there is looking up in it, and therefore I
said it will be with his descendants. The Wind moves and strikes upon
the Earth, therefore I said that it will be in another state. If it is in
another state, it surely will be of the Jiang family. The Jiangs are the
descendants of Grand Peaks. Mountain peaks then match Heaven.
Among things, nothing can be of equal greatness. When Chen declines,
this one will ourish.
Coming to the time when Chen was rst being lost, Chen Huanzi
for the rst time was great in Qi. Later when (Chen) was lost, Chen
Heng gained the government.

By the middle of the fourth century, Qi nally regained some of its former
stature, engaging with the remaining independent states, sometimes as ally,
sometimes as enemy. In , after winning several major battles over the
preceding decade, Lord Wei (r. /–) entered into an alliance with
Lord Huicheng (r. /–) of Wei, the preeminent power of the time,
to recognize each other by the title king (wang). From this time on, the
rulers of Qi were known as kings. King Weis successor, King Xuan (r. –
), is well known for his patronage of many visiting scholars, including
especially Mencius (c. –). He is also supposed to have housed these
scholars at what is usually referred to as the Jixia Academy, a sort of early
think tank. Qi became the center of the intellectual world of the time. One of
King Xuans grandsons, Lord Mengchang (also known as Tian Wen; d. )
is said to have had in his service three thousand retainers who had come
from throughout all of the independent states of the time.
In one of the conversations between King Xuan and Mencius, the king said
that he had been advised to tear down the Bright Hall, and asked whether he
should do so. Menciuss answer spoke to the question of true kingship,
obviously a sore point for a king whose father had more or less arbitrarily
arrogated the title. Mencius told him that the Bright Hall was the seat of
government, and if he wanted to exercise kingly government, he ought not
tear it down. This led the king to ask of kingly government. Mencius said:

In ancient times, when King Wen ruled Mount Qi, the tillers provided
one-ninth (of their produce in tax) and the government servants


Qi

inherited their salaries. At the passes and markets, goods were checked
but not taxed, sh traps were not prohibited, and the guilt of criminals
did not extend to their family members. King Wen always thought rst
to use the government to extend humaneness to widows and widowers,
the elderly without children, and orphans, all the poor people of the
world with nowhere to turn. The Poetry says: Fortunate are the
wealthy ones, Woeful are those who are alone.

When the king expressed his admiration for this sentiment, Mencius, said:
If milord appreciates this, then why dont you put it into practice? The king
responded that he had weaknesses for wealth and sex, to which Mencius
responded by urging the king to share what he had with the people, such that
no one in the state was without enough to eat or someone to love. If he could
do this, he would be a true king, just as King Wen (r. 1099/1056–1050) had
been.
The question of true kingship was also at the heart of the major crisis of
King Xuans reign. Shortly after he had succeeded to power, King Kuai of Yan
(r. –, d. ), wishing to emulate Yao and Shun, the sage-kings of still
older times, abdicated, deposing his own son, the crown prince Ping, in favor
of his chief minister Zi Zhi. King Xuan feared that this precedent would call
into question the fundamental legitimacy of dynastic rule, and so he took
advantage of civil disorder in Yan to attack and occupy the state. This
occupation turned disastrous for Qi. When the Qi army was forced to
withdraw King Wuling of Zhao (r. – B.C.) moved to ll the vacuum
in Yan, installing a younger son of King Kuai as King Zhao of Yan (r. –
). Over the next three decades, with the good rule of King Zhao, Yan
became wealthy and powerful. In , it joined together with all of the
powerful states of the time to attack Qi, forcing King Min of Qi (r. –)
to ee south, where he was captured and killed by the Chu army. With that,
Yan entered the Qi capital of Linzi and captured all of the treasures of the
state. Although Qi would persist until , the last of the independent states
to be conquered by Qin, it would never again regain the power that had been
its under the rule of Duke Huan, four and a half centuries earlier.