CHAPTER
HEREDITARY HOUSES OF THE
EASTERN PEOPLES

From the early Neolithic period through the entirety of Chinas ancient
historical period, numerous peoples lived along Chinas eastern seaboard,
from the present-day province of Fujian in the south all the way to the
Korean peninsula in the north. These peoples were never fully assimilated
into the classical civilizations of the Central Plains, and were generically
referred to by the peoples of the Central Plains cultures as the Eastern
Peoples (Dong Yi), often translated as Eastern Barbarians. However, this
generic terminology masks radical dierences among these people, all of
whom contributed in very signicant ways to the synthesis that would
become Chinese civilization.
A long history of the Eastern Peoples would begin with the archaeological
site at Hemudu, just south of Hangzhou Bay in modern Zhejiang province.
The culture aliated with this type site persisted for more than two millennia
throughout Chinas Neolithic Period, from about 5500 to 3300 BCE, and
presents some of the earliest known evidence for rice cultivation. The people
lived in communal long houses that were raised on stilts, an adaptation to
the watery environment that would also persist well into historical times.
The Hemudu Culture is popularly associated with the Yue culture of
Chinas historical period. In its narrowest sense, Yue refers to a state
mentioned in such Chinese texts as the Zuo Tradition that was centered in
what is now northern Zhejiang province, more or less the same area as the
Hemudu Culture, and which is known to have existed and interacted with
the cultures of Chinas central plains between the seventh and fourth
centuries BCE. Although later Chinese texts created a ctive genealogy for
the Yue people stretching back to Yu the Great and the Xia dynasty, earlier
texts contemporary with the state of Yue emphasize its foreignness: that the
people cut their hair short and tattooed their bodies, lived in houses raised
up o the ground (often described as being like birds nests), and perhaps

Hereditary Houses

most important of all spoke a language that was totally unintelligible to
people of the central plains. Modern scholars associate this language with
either Tai or Austronesian languages (or both), and associate the Yue Culture
with cultures stretching across a broad arc from east to west across most of
southern China and Southeast Asia in one direction, and another string of
cultures stretching south and east from present-day Fujian and Guangdong
through Taiwan, the Philippines, and even further aeld in the South Pacic.
The numerous dierent cultures in these zones were referred to by Chinese
writers sometimes as the Southern Yue and sometimes as the Hundred
Yue. In , after the fall of the Qin dynasty, Zhao Tuo (–),
commander of the Qin Southern Seas (Nanhai) region, established the state
of Southern Yue (Nanyue). Although it comes after the end of the period
covered in this Short History, it deserves mention that in 1983 the tomb of
Zhao Tuos grandson, Zhao Mo (–), the second ruler of Southern Yue
(r. –), was discovered in the middle of modern Guangzhou; lled
with artifacts from throughout the world of the time, it is one of Chinas
great archaeological discoveries. It should be noted too that the name Yue is
better known to people today in the pronunciation Viet; indeed, Vietnam
simply means South of Yue.
Aside from the states of Wu and Yue, whose meteoric rises and falls in the
decades just before and after certainly caught the attention of the other
states of the time and captured the imagination of Chinese readers ever
since, the peoples generically referred to as the Southern Yue seem never to
have had any direct inuence on the northern states (though a good
argument has been made that they were the ultimate source of the crossbow,
the weapon that so decisively changed ancient Chinese warfare about ).
The same is not true of the peoples living north of Wu and Yue and generically
referred to as the Eastern Peoples (Dong Yi). Already in the oracle-bone
inscriptions of the Shang dynasty, the Peoples of the Huai River valley loom
large as an adversary of the last Shang king Di Xin (r. 1086–1045). Di Xin led
an almost year-long campaign from Anyang into the Huai River to attack
them, the best documented military campaign—at least in terms of the day-
to-day movement of the troops—prior to the Han dynasty. With the
subsequent Zhou conquest of Shang, the Eastern Peoples became in turn the
principal adversaries of the Zhou.
Shortly after the Zhou conquest, as the Zhou royal house deputed its sons
and allies to colonize the east, Dan, the Duke of Zhou, was given the
responsibility to bring under control the area around Mount Tai in what is
today southwestern Shandong. The city of Lu that he and his son established


The Eastern Peoples

there, at Qufu, Shandong, seems originally to have been inhabited by Shang
peoples, but other polities in the area are described generically as Eastern
Peoples. Although both bronze inscriptions from the time and also later
accounts credit the Duke of Zhou with conquering these polities, they would
maintain their identity as Eastern Peoples at least until the time of Confucius.
In fact, there is at least some suggestion that Confuciuss father was born in
Zou, the capital city of the state of Zhulou, an Eastern Peoples state, and that
his mother was a member of those people. To whatever extent this heritage
may have inuenced Confucius himself can only be conjectured.
Further south in the Huai River valley proper, the native people seem
never to have been brought under the control of the Zhou, even if the Zhou
kings claim to rule all under Heaven is usually understood to have included
this area. The antagonistic relationship between the Zhou and the Eastern
Peoples is best to be seen in a long series of inscribed bronze vessels from the
time of King Mu of Zhou (r. –). While these inscriptions, like almost
all bronze inscriptions, which—in the formulation of a later ritual classic—
were intended to praise the beautiful and not to mention the ugly, portray
the Zhou army as winning the war, reading all of them together leaves little
doubt that the Zhou were on the defensive, ghting to defend the heartland
region around their eastern capital Chengzhou, located at present-day
Luoyang, Henan. The following vessel, the Lu Dong you, has been known
since the Qing dynasty.

The king commanded Dong, saying: Oh, the Huai Peoples have dared
to attack the inner state; you shall take the Chengzhou legions to
defend at Xu Garrison. Elder Yongfu praised Lus accomplishments,
and awarded (him) ten strands of cowries. Lu bows and touches his
head to the ground, in response extolling the Elders benecence,
herewith making for his cultured deceased-father Dong Yi this
treasured oertory vessel.

In 1975, another vessel, the Dong gui, which may have been cast by the same
person, was excavated in the Zhouyuan area of Shaanxi province. It is one of
the most unusual of all bronze inscriptions in that the patron of the
inscription, Dong (written with the same character as the Dong of the Lu
Dong you), credits his accomplishments to the spiritual aid of his deceased
mother. The inscription is somewhat awkwardly worded, vacillating between
referring to Dong sometimes in the rst person and sometimes in the third
person, but it seems to reect his heartfelt gratitude to his mother.

Hereditary Houses

It was the sixth month, rst auspiciousness, yiyou (day ), at the Jing
Encampment. The warriors attacked X. Dong led the supervisors and
legions to chase after and defend against the warriors at Yu Woods,
striking the warring Hu.
My cultured mother strongly and earnestly opened the march,
granting rmness to his heart, eternally giving inheritance to his body,
and ruling and conquering his enemies. (I) took heads, shackled
two chiefs, and captured the warriors weapons: shields, spears,
halberds, bows, quivers, arrows, uniforms, and helmets, in all
pieces. (I) captured warrior captives and their uniforms. There was
no harm to Dongs body.
Your son Dong bows and touches his head to the ground, in
response extolling his cultured mothers fortune and valor, herewith
making for his cultured mother of the day Geng this treasured
oertory tureen. Help your son Dong for ten thousand years herewith
morning and night oer liality to his cultured mother. May his sons
sons and grandsons grandsons eternally treasure (it).

While Dong of course claims to have won a great victory (otherwise he
would most certainly not have cast a bronze vessel), it is signicant that the
battle took place at Yu Woods, which was almost certainly located at Yexian,
Henan, just twenty-ve kilometers southeast of Pingdingshan, Henan.
Pingdingshan was the site of a Zhou colony, Ying, founded by a younger
brother of King Cheng (r. 1042/1035–1006); it was obviously located there to
defend against the Eastern Peoples.
The later Biographies of the Eastern Peoples of the History of the Latter
Han, which draws on local accounts of these people rather than records of
the Zhou kings, provides the following statement about this time.

The People of Xu arrogated the title and then led the Nine Peoples to
attack Ancestral Zhou, reaching west as far as the Yellow River. King
Mu feared that they were about to break through and then divided the
many lords of the eastern lands, commanding King Yan of Xu to lead
them.

The state of Xu was located precisely in the area of the Yu Woods mentioned in
the Dong gui inscription. This seems to conrm that the Eastern Peoples attack
reached all the way to the Yellow River. Although this gives credit to King Mu
for commanding King Yan of Xu to lead the Nine Peoples, obviously


The Eastern Peoples

referring to the many dierent groups of people living in the Huai River valley,
it is not hard to imagine that this was simply a Zhou rationalization for their
diplomatic recognition of King Yan as the leader of the Eastern Peoples.
Warfare between the Eastern Peoples and Zhou forces continued throughout
almost the entirety of the Western Zhou period. Many of the bronze inscriptions
describing this warfare show that the battles continued to be fought along the
southern approaches to Chengzhou, the Zhou eastern capital. It was only
during the rst half of the reign of King Xuan (r. –) that the king
attempted to restore Zhou control over the eastern territories. One of the poems
of the Classic of Poetry entitled The Jiang and Han celebrates a Zhou campaign
into the Huai River Valley. The rst three stanzas of the poem claim that Zhou
control was everywhere, Reaching even to the southern sea.

The Jiang and Han bubbling, bubbling, The warriors crest upon crest.
It is not for peace, not for sport, Its the Huai Peoples weve come to
catch.
Having sent out our chariots, Having set out our banners,
It is not for peace, not for rest, Its the Huai Peoples weve come to
snatch.
The Jiang and Han boiling, boiling, The warriors glimmer and gleam.
Laying out all the four quarters, Reporting success to the king.
The four quarters being at peace, The kings countries are all secure.
Now that there is no more ghting, The kings heart is set at ease.
By the banks of the Jiang and Han, The king commands Hu of Shao:
That he govern the four quarters, Throughout all of our borderlands.
Its not long suering, not piercing; The kings countries to the ends,
From the borders to the hamlets, Reaching even to the southern sea.

This poem too is almost certainly Zhou propaganda. Another inscribed
bronze vessel, the Jufu xugai, cast just a few years after the time that the
poem The Jiang and Han is supposed to describe records another Zhou
foray into the territory of the Southern Huai Peoples. Although most
contemporary Chinese historians understand this as an embassy to obtain
tribute oerings from the Huai Peoples, a straightforward reading of the
inscription suggests a very dierent scenario: that Jufu, the patron of the
vessel, was sent to present tribute to the Huai Peoples, in the hope that they
would in turn reciprocate with tribute of their own. This was yet another
form of diplomacy: an early form of international trade.

Hereditary Houses

It was the kings eighteenth year, rst month; Nanzhong Bangfu
commanded Jufu to approach the many lords of the south and to lead
Gaofu to present the Southern Huai Peoples their tax and their tribute,
and to be solicitous of the Peoples customs, such that they would not
dare not to respect and be awed by the kings command and in return
present us their presents and their tribute. We then arrived at Huai,
and of the small and large countries none dared not completely to
respond to the kings command. In the fourth month, returning as far
as Cai, (I) make this set xu-tureen; may Jufu for ten thousand years
eternally use it with much benecence.

The nal group of eastern peoples to be considered here, even if only very
briey, lived far to the north, and claimed heritage that has been much
contested, both in China and especially in Korea. According to Chinese
legends, late in the reign of King Di Xin of the Shang dynasty, as the king
grew increasingly violent, his uncle Jizi went o into exile in what is today
Korea. In China, Jizis legendary association with the Shang dynasty served
as justication for the later colonization of Korea during the Han dynasty.
On the other hand, in Korea, Jizi, or in Korean pronunciation Kija, has long
been viewed as the founder of the Old Chosn dynasty (n.d.– BCE), the
earliest known state in Korean history. Almost nothing is known of the early
history of the state. According to the most credible account, it was only in
that Wei Man, a refugee from the northern Chinese state of Yan ed to
Chosn and became ruler there. Since Wei Mans usurpation is both outside
the territory of ancient China and outside the temporal bounds of this short
history, it can be mentioned just in passing. However, it is interesting to note
that Korean scholars debate among themselves the ultimate derivation of
the Chosn people: from the nobility of the Chinese people, or from the
Eastern Peoples. And a credible argument can be made that it was only after
the Chosn dynasty became powerful in its own right that Chinese people
adapted the legend of Jizi going into exile there to claim their own authority
over it. Whatever the actual relations between the peoples of the Korean
peninsula and areas to the west that are now part of China may never be
known, but that their ethnicity is still debated is an important reminder of
the importance of ancient history.