CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF SUN WU AND SUN BIN

Sun Wu, better known as Sunzi or Master Sun (–), is one of the best
known names from ancient China, but one whose life is least known. He is the
supposed author of The Art of War, the most famous of all Chinese treatises
on warfare, one that has inuenced generals and statesmen of all later periods
not only in China, but more recently, also throughout the rest of the world.
Nevertheless, he was never mentioned in texts from his own lifetime, or even
shortly thereafter, and certainly not by name. Indeed, it is not even certain
that Wu, which means military or martial, was actually his name, or if it
was a kind of title ascribed to him because of his fame as a general. It is not
known either when he was born, or even where he was born. All sources agree
that he served at the court of King Hel of Wu (r. –), and was
instrumental in making that ruler of what had previously been a minor state
on the periphery of Chinese civilization the Premier of all the states of the
time. Probably for this reason, the Springs and Autumns of Wu and Yue says
that he was born in the southern state of Wu, and spent his entire career there.
On the other hand, his biography in Records of the Historian says without any
further elaboration that he was from the northern state of Qi.
The biographies of Sunzi in both of these sources consist almost entirely
of a single anecdote, which most historians regard, however, as apocryphal.
The account in Records of the Historian is somewhat shorter; it reads:

Sunzi was a militarist, a man of Qi. He showed his Art of War to Hel,
King of Wu. Hel said: I have glanced over all thirteen chapters; can we
have a little test of your training of troops? He responded saying: OK.
Hel said: Can we test it with women? He said: OK. With that it was
approved that the beautiful women of the harem were brought out,
in all. Sunzi divided them into two brigades, making the kings two
favorite consorts the brigade leaders. He commanded them all to take
hold of halberds, and commanded them saying: Do you know your
heart and your left and right hands and your back? The women said:

Biographies

We know them. Sunzi said: At Forward, then look to your heart; at
Left, look to your left hand; at Right, look to your right hand; and at
Rear, look to your back. The women said: Alright. The instructions
having been given, he then set up the battle-axe of authority, and then
gave the command three times and explained it ve times. With that, he
drummed them to the right, and the women all burst out laughing.
Sunzi said: If the instructions are not understood, and the commands
not well practiced, this is the fault of the general. Again commanding
them three times and explaining ve times, he drummed them to the
left; the women again burst out laughing. Sunzi said: If the instructions
are not understood, and the commands not well practiced, this is the
fault of the general. But if they are already understood and you do not
do as you should, this is the fault of the troops. Then he was about to
behead the left and right brigade leaders. When the king of Wu watching
from the platform saw that his beloved consorts were about to be
beheaded, he was greatly alarmed, and hastily sent a messenger to give
an order saying: I already know that the general is capable of using
troops. Without these two consorts, my food would no longer have any
taste; please do not behead them. Sunzi said: I have already been
commanded to be the general. When the general is with the army, he
need not accept commands from the ruler. Thereupon he beheaded
them accordingly, and made the next in line as the brigade leaders. With
that, he again drummed them. All of the women went left and right,
forward and back, knelt and stood exactly according to the rules, none
daring to make a sound. With that, Sunzi sent a messenger to report to
the king saying: The troops have been trained. If the king would like to
see them tested further, however the king would like to use them, they
would brave even water or re. The King of Wu said: You can stop now,
I have no desire to watch any further. Sunzi said: Milord only likes the
theory, but isnt able to make use of the reality. With that, Hel knew
that Sunzi was capable of using troops, and in the end made him general.
To the west, they destroyed the mighty Chu, entering the capital Ying; to
the north, they put fear into Qi and Jin, and made their names manifest
to all the lords, Sunzi taking part in the strength.

We can let pass whether this demonstration took place or not. The
account does seem to be consistent with the view of the general as portrayed
in The Art of War. The statement to King Hel that Milord only likes the
theory, but isnt able to make use of the reality, intemperate though it seems,


Sun Wu and Sun Bin

may allude to Chapter Six of the Art of War: Emptiness and Solidity. One
precept in this chapter combines well theory and practice.

The shape of the army resembles water: the motion of water avoids the
high and rushes to the low; the victory of the army avoids the solid
and strikes the empty. Water controls its motion according to the
terrain, and armies control their victories according to the enemy.
Therefore, armies have no xed dynamic and no constant shape; when
they are able to change according to the enemy to take the victory, they
are termed divine. Therefore, the Five Stages have no constant victory
and the Four Seasons have no constant position; days are shorter and
longer, and months wax and wane.

The notion here of changing according to the circumstances is reminiscent
of the philosophy seen in the Laozi, and for this reason The Art of War is
often regarded as having Daoist inuences.
The coda to Sunzis biography in Records of the Historian alludes briey to
the great successes won by the Wu armies under the leadership of King Hel
and Sunzi: defeating the great southern state of Chu and occupying its
capital, which they did in . According to the Springs and Autumns of Wu
and Yue, Sunzi commanded the Wu army at the decisive battle of Boju, when
the Chu army was smashed, though a detailed account of the battle in the
Zuo Tradition, the earliest and most authoritative history of the period, does
not mention his name. As for putting fear into Qi and and Jin, this would
seem to allude to the success of King Fuchai of Wu (r. –), the son of
King Hel. It was Fuchai who turned Wus attention to the northern states,
succeeding in being recognized as Premier by all of the northern states at the
conference of Huangchi in . Although some later sources suggest that
Sunzi served King Fuchai, since he is not mentioned together with Fuchai in
any of the standard historical sources, his date of death is routinely given as
, the year in which King Hel died.
Of the many gures from ancient China credited with being great
generals and especially with writing treatises on warfare, there is another
Sun: Sun Bin (–), whose name Bin means Kneecap. Whereas
almost nothing is known about Sunzis life, quite a bit is known about Sun
Bins life. Sun Bin was a native of the northern state of Qi and, according to
Records of the Historian, he was a descendant of the great Sun Wu; this
doubtless explains why that text says that Sunzi was also born in Qi. Sun Bin
is supposed to have studied military strategy with the shadowy gure known

Biographies

as Guiguzi (The Master of Ghost Valley), the supposed author of a book by
the same name that is one of the earliest Chinese writings on diplomacy. He
is also said to have memorized Sunzis Art of War. Among many notable
students of Guiguzi, another gure who would become a general and whose
life would be intertwined with that of Sun Bin was Pang Juan (–). Sun
Bin and Pang Juan were close friends while they were classmates, but Pang
Juan subsequently became jealous of Sun Bins abilities. Later, when Pang
Juan gained early success while serving under Lord Hui of Wei (r. /–
), the greatest ruler of the time, he encouraged Sun Bin to come to Wei as
well. However, after Sun Bin arrived, he was accused of treason, apparently
instigated by none other than Pang Juan. The standard punishment for
treason would have been execution, but in Sun Bins case it was commuted
to branding of the face and removal of the kneecap. After further travails in
Wei, Sun Bin managed to escape and return to Qi, where he became a deputy
to the general Tian Ji (. –).
The fortunes of Sun Bin and Pang Juan would intersect twice in the
middle of the fourth century. In both cases, Sun Bin would get much the
better of his one-time classmate. In , a Wei army led by Pang Juan attacked
the state of Zhao, besieging the Zhao capital of Handan (in present-day
Hebei province). When Zhao sought relief from Qi, Sun Bin proposed a
roundabout strategy of rst attacking the Wei capital of Daliang (at present-
day Kaifeng, Henan). Then, when the Wei army under Pang Juan broke o
the siege of Handan to return to rescue Daliang, the Qi army ambushed
them, winning a major victory at the battle of Guiling. Twelve years later,
King Hui of Wei again sent Pang Juan on campaign, this time against the
state of Han. Han too requested that Qi come to its aid, which it again did
with an army under the combined leadership of Tian Ji and Sun Bin. Again
employing a ruse, the Qi army feigned a direct attack against the Wei army,
but then quickly withdrew behind a narrow valley. When the Wei army
pursued, Qi fell upon them, inicting a crushing defeat; Pang Juan committed
suicide rather than be captured. This was the battle of Maling (in present-
day Shenxian county, Henan), one of the most famous battles of the Warring
States period; the state of Wei never really recovered from its defeat.
Despite winning a great victory, both Tian Ji and Sun Bin were
apprehensive about returning to Qi, fearful that their enhanced reputations
would bring about their downfall. Instead, they both went south, literally, to
the state of Chu, where King Xuan of Chu (r. –) installed Tian Ji as
the lord of Jiangnan (the area to the south of the Yangzi River). Sun Bin, for
his part, remained in Chu for more than twenty years, returning to Qi only


Sun Wu and Sun Bin

in the last two or three years of his life, when he was hosted by King Xuan of
Qi (r. –). Despite having witnessed great violence during his lifetime,
he seems to have died in peace.
Probably sometime after winning his great victory at the battle of Maling,
Sun Bin wrote his own art of war book. The Art of War of Sun Bin is included
in the Han-dynasty History of Han bibliography of the contents of the Han
imperial library, described as being in eighty-nine chapters. The book was
often quoted in medieval sources but was lost sometime before the beginning
of the Tang dynasty (– CE). This caused many historians to assume
that the book never really existed, mentions of it mistakenly referring to
Sunzis Art of War. Then in April, 1972, archaeologists opened a Han-dynasty
tomb at Yinqueshan, Linyi, Shandong, and in it found not only an almost
complete text of The Art of War of Sunzi, but also fragments from sixteen
dierent chapters of The Art of War of Sun Bin. It did exist after all.