CHAPTER
ESSAY ON THE HEAVENS

The stars shined brighter in antiquity. Even if this were not actually the case,
it was certainly true perceptually. Once the sun went down, without ambient
light to compete with their brightness or pollution in the skies to lter it, the
stars were the entertainment for the night. Just as modern movie stars ll
their fans with awe, even more so—as far as we call tell—the nightly shows
of the heavenly stars inspired awe in their ancient observers. Those observers
saw patterns in the stars, which from an early period gave the Chinese term
for astronomy: tianwen heavenly patterns.
Archaeologists in China suggest that they have uncovered artifactual
evidence of one of the most important of these patterns from a tomb of the
fourth millennium BCE. Tomb M45, excavated in 1987 at Puyang, Henan,
appears to show the deceased anked by cowrie shells arranged in the shapes
of a dragon and a tiger. In later Chinese astronomy, these two forms were
seen high in the sky, to the east and west respectively. The dragon in particular
is understood to be a representation of a group of stars stretching from the
two stars Spica and , through eight stars the curling shape of which
suggested to observers in the West a scorpion (and thus the constellation
Scorpio). Observers in ancient China saw all of these stars as a single
constellation, which they named Dragon (Long), Spica and being
identied as its two Horns (Jiao) and the eight stars of Scorpio being its
Tail (Wei), with intervening stars making up the Neck (Gang) and the

Heart (Xin): , which the oracle-bone form of the character for

dragon, , matches very well.
The ancient observers of the heavenly patterns saw too that the apparent
motion of the stars was not at all random, but rather recurred predictably
night in and night out, year in and year out. When correlated with events on
the ground, these appearances gave rise to the calendar—and to the
expectation even in the depths of winter that life would continue along with

Essays

the constancy of the sky. Although in winter the Dragon would not be visible
at all in the night sky, star gazers knew that at the beginning of February its
Horns would appear again in the eastern sky at dusk; that by mid-summer
the entirety of that constellation would be arrayed across the southern sky;
and that in the autumn it would again sink, head rst, below the western
horizon. On earth, plants, trees and even many animals would correspond
with the movements of the Dragon: coming out in spring, coming to full
ower in summer, being ready for harvest in autumn, and hibernating in the
winter.
What purports to be the oldest statement concerning astronomy in the
Chinese literary tradition is found in the Canon of Yao chapter of the Exalted
Scriptures. In it, the legendary ruler Yao commanded two brothers, or perhaps
two clans, the Xi and He, to calculate and depict the sun and the moon, the
stars and planets, and respectfully allot to the people the seasons. After this,
according to this chapter, Yao appointed members of the two clans to reside
in the east, south, west, and north, and to determine the correct times of the
solstices and equinoxes. It goes on that once the spring solstice is determined,
the folk divide up and the birds and beasts mate and breed, while at the
autumn solstice the folk are calm and the birds and the beasts grow new
feathers and fur. This correlation between the stars and the seasons would
continue ever after to be a dening feature of Chinese astronomy.
The correlation between the stars and the seasons would give rise to a
genre of literature known in the West as stars and seasons texts; these attest
to an early environmental consciousness. One of the earliest such manuals is
in a chapter entitled The Four Seasons in the Guanzi, one of the most
important early works of political philosophy. It recounts the specic
activities appropriate to each season. The text begins by noting: Commands
have their seasons; if there were no seasons, then it would be necessary to
observe and follow whence the heavens come, but with the ve vastnesses
and six murkinesses, who could know it? However, thanks to the sages of
the past, the seasonal commands had already been catalogued and been
made available in this text. The commands for spring are as follows.

The eastern quadrant is designated to the stars; its season is spring; its
breath is the wind. The wind generates wood and bone. Its virtues are
joy and growth which are emitted in moderation. Make seasonal its
activities and commands: repair and clean the places of the spirits, and
respectfully pray that decay be blocked; venerate the upright yang, put
in order the dikes, hoe and plant the elds, erect bridges, repair canals,


The Heavens

roof the houses and x the plumbing; resolve grievances and pardon
the guilty, bringing the four quarters into communication. Then the
soft breezes and sweet rains will come, the hundred families will be
long-lived, and the hundred insects will be abundant. This is called the
virtue of the stars. The stars control the emission of the winds.
This is why if in spring you enact the governances of winter then
there will be exhaustion; if you enact the governances of autumn, then
there will be frost; if you enact the governances of summer, then there
will be desires. This is why in the third month of spring, on the jia and
yi days, you issue the ve governances, the rst of which is caring for
youths and orphans and releasing the guilty; the second of which is
bestowing ranks and rewards; the third of which is repairing canals
when the ice has thawed and returning men who have absconded; the
fourth of which is called levelling the precipices, repairing the boundary
markers, and erecting the eld rows; and the fth of which is called not
killing the young animals and not plucking owers and cutting stems.
If these ve governances are timely, then the spring rains will come.

This correlation between the stars and seasons, between astronomy and the
calendar, was perhaps the most important practical aspect of ancient Chinese
star-gazing. There was also a systematic logic in the early Chinese understanding
of the night sky. Ancient Chinese texts divided the heavenly bodies into four
general categories: the sun; moon; asterisms, which included what we now call
stars (i.e., xed asterisms) and planets (moving stars), as well as such
occasional manifestations as comets; and constellations, i.e., groupings of stars.
As seen from the earth, the sun appears to move vis--vis the stars along a xed
path, the ecliptic. This apparent motion take place over the course of a solar
year, just over days, with the sun moving a little less than one degree a day
around the -degree arc of the ecliptic. In ancient Chinese astronomy, the
ecliptic was divided into four regions, each of ninety degrees and each
corresponding to one quadrant of the sky: the Azure Dragon in the east as
described above; the Red Bird in the south; the White Tiger in the west; and
the Murky Warrior in the north, which is also known as the Black Turtle.
Each one of these spiritual animals is composed of seven discrete
constellations, known as lunar lodges, such as the Horns and Tail of the
Azure Dragon mentioned above. These twenty-eight lunar lodges correspond
to the spaces that the moon traverses during its monthly rotation around the
earth. It is important to note that while some of the groupings of stars
correspond to the zodiacal constellations of Western astronomy, they do not

Essays

do so systematically, but rather have their own unique logic. That being said, it
is likely that the system derived from the twenty-eight naksatras of Indian
astronomy, which in turn were derived from ancient Mesopotamian astronomy.
While it is possible that some of these lunar lodges are mentioned already
in the classics of Poetry and Changes, suggesting that this system of twenty-
eight lunar lodges was established already by the rst centuries of the rst
millennium BCE, the earliest certain artifactual evidence of the system is
seen in the ornamentation on a lacquer hamper discovered in 1977 in the
tomb of Lord Yi of Zeng at Leigudun, Suixian, Henan. As in the case of the
much earlier tomb at Puyang, this design prominently features the dragon
and tiger to the east and west. However, between them, in a circle, is written
the names of the twenty-eight lunar lodges, and in the middle of them, is a
depiction of the Dipper, i.e., the Big Dipper and the North Star. The Dipper
was thought to rotate through all of the other stars, pointing to the seasons
and thus establishing the calendar.
Somewhat later, similar depictions were used to correlate astronomical
phenomena and the days and months, apparently in an attempt to foretell
future events. Several examples of a diviners board that was used to track
the stars have been found. One such board was discovered in 1977 in a tomb
at Fuyang, Anhui. It consists of two pieces: a square bottom board
(representing earth), on which were written the names of the twenty-eight
lunar lodges, as well as the heavenly stems and earthly branches, which were
used for counting days. On top of this square board was a round disk
(representing heaven). It too has the twenty-eight lunar lodges written
around its perimeter, as well as the twelve months of the year. Finally, in the
middle of the disk, corresponding to the top of heaven, are the seven stars of
the Northern Dipper. This round disk of heaven would have been rotated on
the square board of earth to point to the stars, the months and the days.
The importance of the Dipper in these depictions of the stars points to a
second basic feature of ancient Chinese astronomy: its circum-polar
orientation around the North Star, about which the Big Dipper and all the
other stars appear to revolve. So integral to Chinese notions of the night sky
was the North Star that even Confucius (–) integrated it into his
political philosophy of the ruler doing little more than setting a proper
example for his subjects:

To govern through virtue can be compared to the North Star; which
occupies its place while all of the stars support it.


The Heavens

Figure . Han-dynasty wall carving depicting Tai Yi, the Great One, riding in the
chariot of the Northern Dipper; from Jin shi suo (1821).

It is possible that Di, the Shang high god or gods, was identied with the celestial
pole, and it is certain that the later high god Tai Yi or the Grand One had his
heavenly home there. A Han-dynasty wall carving depicts Tai Yi riding in the
chariot of the Northern Dipper (i.e., the four stars that make up the dipper
proper), while all the animals and his subjects pay obeisance around him.
The stars would also come to be seen as gods, or in some cases people
would become stars. One of the foundational myths of China doubtless was
an attempt to explain the night sky. The myth concerns a battle between the
Yellow Emperor and an adversary named Chiyou, depicted in later sources as
having a metal head in the shape of a bull, a human torso, but the hindquarters
of a bear. Through the course of ten years of battle, Chiyou is said to have
caused a great fog to descend upon the battleeld, blinding the Yellow
Emperor until he invented the south-facing chariot, considered in China to
be the invention of the compass, allowing him nally to defeat Chiyou. The
south-facing chariot is but a mythological rationalization of the Dipper,
pointing the way to the directions and, in some ways, the beginning of time.
As for Chiyou, despite his loss in this battle, he was subsequently worshipped
as the God of War, depicted as a comet blazing through the sky.
The story from the Canon of Yao of the brothers Xi and He, who were
put in charge of the stars and teaching the people about the seasons, was also
depicted in later texts as a battle in the sky; although the names are dierent,

Essays

the story of brothers set apart from each other and destined never to meet is
the same. The Zuo Tradition preserves the following story set in the year .

The lord of Jin was ill, and the Elder of Zheng sent Zi Chan to Jin to pay
him a visit and to ask about the illness. Shu Xiang asked him about it,
saying: As for our lords illness, the diviners say that Substance
Submerging and Terrace Nag are hexing him, but none of the scribes
know them; dare I ask who these gods are? Zi Chan said: In antiquity,
the emperor Gao Xin had two sons, the elder named Obstruction the
Elder and the younger named Substance Submerging. They lived in a
vast forest, but couldnt abide each other, daily seeking out shields and
battle-axes with which to attack each other. The succeeding emperor
(Yao) did not approve and moved Obstruction the Elder to the Mound
of Shang to preside over (the constellation) Chronogram. The men of
Shang have based themselves on this, and thus Chronogram is the
Shang star. He moved Substance Submerging to the Great Xia (the area
of the state of Jin) to preside over the star Triaster. The men of Tang
have based themselves on this, in order to serve the Xia and the Shang.

It is interesting to note that the two gods Obstruction the Elder and Substance
Submerging are simply the constellations known in the west as Scorpio and
Orion. Their banishment to the east and west respectively is but a mythic
explanation of the natural fact that these two constellations never appear
together in the night sky: as Scorpio arises in the east, the constellation
Orion sets (or, in Chinese mythological and astronomical terminology,
submerges) in the west. It is interesting too that their mutual antagonism,
to the extent of seeking out weapons to do battle with each other, nds a
counterpart in the Greek myth of the god Orion, who after doing battle with
a giant scorpion plunged into the sea.
Some battles of ancient China that actually did take place on the ground
were also seen to be pregured in the sky. One very rare astronomical event, a
conjunction of the ve naked-eye-visible planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn), which takes place only every ve hundred or so years, coincided
repeatedly with the rise and fall of new dynasties. Such planetary conjunctions
occurred in 1953 and 1576 BCE, just before the beginning of the Xia and Shang
dynasties respectively. Finally, in 1059 BCE, another such conjunction took
place, just years before Zhou overthrew the Shang dynasty. Later texts correlate
it in turn with the passing of the Mandate of Heaven. This foundation of Chinese
political philosophy was thought literally to have been written in the stars.