CHAPTER
ESSAY ON MUSIC

In the Chinese language, there is an intrinsic relationship between music
(yue) and joy (le), which despite the dierent pronunciations of the words
in modern Chinese, their ancient pronunciations were almost identical, and
they are both written with the same character. But more than just the
emotional enjoyment one derives from music, it was also understood that
music was a form of non-verbal communication between an individual or a
group of musical performers and both the social and natural worlds. An early
treatise on music, the Record of Music begins with the following passage:
In all cases, music comes to life from the human heart. It is the case that
things cause the human heart to be moved. Resonating with things, it
takes shape in sounds; the sounds corresponding with each other gives
life to changes; and changes producing a pattern is what are called
notes. Putting notes side by side and enjoying them, and adding to
them shields and halberds, feathers and pennants, is called music.
In addition to the aective derivation of music, this passage entails at least a
couple of other points that are basic to it. Music is sound, but it is not just
sound; it is only when dierent sounds—notes, when they are dierentiated—
are put together into a coherent pattern does sound become music. But even
this does not exhaust what music was in ancient China. The shields and
halberds, feathers and pennants that were to be added to the sounds refer to
the costumes that martial and civil dancers wore as they danced to the
music; dance too was an intrinsic part of music.
Of course, it was theoretically possible for a single individual to make
music in solitude by playing a single instrument, or by simply singing a
cappella or even just whistling. However, the full communicative force of
music was produced in a social setting, and the social setting that is most
often mentioned in ancient Chinese texts was either the ancestral temple or
the royal (or ducal) court. One of the earliest descriptions of such a musical

#Essays

performance is the poem Blind Musicians, which is contained in the Zhou
Hymns, the most ancient portion of the Classic of Poetry. I include the
Chinese characters; even those unable to read them will see at a glance that
the lines are uniform in having four characters, which I have tried to replicate
by translating into a modied iambic tetrameter. This meter, which is
characteristic not only of the poetry in the Classic of Poetry, but also of much
of ancient Chinese prose literature, probably derives from the four-beat
meter of the music (or eight beats in two lines), the underlying rhythm of
which was supplied by bells and drums. The visual appearance of the Chinese
characters may not suggest this percussive aural dimension, but perhaps the
English translation captures to some extent their sounds. Another feature of
poems in the Classic of Poetry is that they frequently use onomatopoeic reduplicatives to describe the sound of the music: here booming-booming
(huang-huang) for the sound of the pan-pipes and utes. This linguistic
feature is seen rst on inscriptions of bells themselves.

Set in the ancestral temple, musical performances were an ideal means of
social communication. Performed after the sacricial oerings had been
made to the ancestors, it was thought that the music would carry the prayers
up to those ancestors. Whether the ancestors would hear them or not, the
visitors to the temple would certainly nd an impressive spectacle. Imagine
having just observed the food and wine oered to the ancestors, and then
participating in a banquet in which those oerings were then consumed by

#Music

the guests. Then, with the dishes cleared away, the musical entertainment
would begin. The stage would have been set in advance: the bells and drums
and chime-stones, the mainstays of the earliest orchestras, were hung from
their racks to either side of the main stage, carefully calibrated in dierent
sizes so as to produce dierent notes. Other instruments were placed to the
fore: mouth organs, bamboo utes and string instruments; these would
carry the melody. In front of these instruments and between the bells and
drums would be ranks of dancers, all dressed in their nest robes and
moving in unison. Another poem from the Classic of Poetry, called Thorny
Brambles, describes the scene. Too lengthy to quote in its entirety, the rst
stanzas describe the sacrice and the banquet; the last two stanzas then
describe the musical entertainment.
Ceremonies being nished, The bells and drums having sounded,
The pious grandson takes his place.
The presiding priest brings the report:
The spirits are all drunk. The august corpse is now to rise.
The bells and drums escort the corpse, The divine guard comes in return.
The many aides and lords ladies Clear the dishes without delay.
The many uncles and brothers Make ready to feast on their own.
Musicians all enter to play, To make secure fortune to come.
Your meats having been presented, None resentful, all celebrate.
Being drunk and being sated, The young and old touch heads to ground.
Spirits enjoyed the food and drink, Granting our lord longevity.
Very kindly, very timely, May he keep them until the end.
With sons sons and grandsons grandsons Never failing to extend
them.
Songs such as Thorny Brambles would come to be regarded as the
classical music of ancient China. But this was not the only music of the time.
Once when Mencius (c. –) was having an audience with King
Huicheng of Wei (r. –, –), the king said to him: I dont
understand the music of the kings of old; I only like popular music. Mencius
attempted to turn the conversation to a lesson in good government, but the
kings preference points to ways some music changed in the several hundred
years from when the Classic of Poetry was composed until the time of King
Huicheng. Songs, apparently now driven by the lilting melodies of utes and
zithers rather than the somber pounding of bells and drums, could grow to
great lengths and could move from the ancestral temple to the halls of court.

#Essays

The following brief passage from a long song called Summoning the Soul
included in the collection Verses of Chu describes a song and dance
performance that seems to have ended in an orgy. Perhaps it is not so unusual
that King Huicheng would enjoy popular music.
The delicacies still not cleared, the female musicians take their places.
Arraying the bells and setting the drums, they launch into the latest
songs.
Crossing the River, Plucking the Water-Chestnut, Starting up
Holding Up the Water-Lily.
Beautiful people all drunk, Rouged faces are all ushed.
Flirtatious smiles and eeting glances, Eyes wave from one to another.
All made up in gauzy silks, The beauty is truly rare.
Long hair piled on high, So many bright colors aclash.
Two rows of eight costumed dancers, Start up the Dance of Zheng.
Sleeves like swaying reeds, Bodies dipping to the oor.
Pan-pipes and zithers join wildly, The drums booming out.
The halls of court thunder and shake, As they start up Whirling Chu.
The songs of Wu and tunes of Cai, Now presenting the Great Pitch.
Men and women sitting together, All tangled in a heap.
Hat-strings and sashes come undone, Whirling around all mixed up.
This is not to say that classical music did not have its own sensual quality.
The most famous poem—song—in the Classic of Poetry is the very rst one in
the collection; it is called J-o-i-n, the Osprey. It begins with the call of one
osprey to another, which leads the male protagonist to think of his lover.
Beginning with a brief description of some aspect of nature—birds and
animals, plants and trees—and then following this with the main topic of the
poem, almost invariably human relationships and human emotions, is a
common feature of poems in the Airs of the States section of the Classic of
Poetry, and would continue to characterize much of Chinese poetry also in
much later times. Some modern readers regard these references to nature as
more or less meaningless, intended only to set the rhyme scheme to be used in
the poem. This is a serious misreading of what in Chinese intellectual history
is often referred to as correlative thought, which sees an intrinsic relationship
between the natural and human realms. When Confucius (–)
encouraged his disciples to study the Classic of Poetry in order to be able to
recognize the names of birds and animals, plants and trees, his interest was
almost surely not pedantically biological. Instead, he believed that birds and

#Music

animals, plants and trees are part of the same world order as family members
and statesmen. Some animals are crafty, while others can be tamed; some
plants are bitter, while others are sweet. According to Confucius, the better we
understand nature, the better we will understand human society as well.
Indeed, in some senses, the poets and musicians of ancient China transcribed
the sounds of nature into their poetry and music. In J-o-i-n, the Osprey, the
call the osprey makes is written with Chinese characters, guan guan, which
mean join together; indeed, they might even be rendered more crudely as
bang bang. The poem climaxes with the banging of bells and drums, usually
understood as a celebration of the marriage of the protagonist and his lover.
The Chinese characters again show something of the structure of the poem.

Shy and slender is the chaste girl, With
bell and drum delighting her.
Bells and drums were clearly the premier instruments of ancient Chinese
music, the bells in particular requiring great expenditures—and great
expertise—to be produced. One of the unique features of the earliest Chinese

#Essays

chime bells, already evident beginning in the mid-Western Zhou, is that they
had two distinct tones, an octave apart, depending on where they were
struck. Since the bells were graduated in size, they each produced dierent
tones. Later music came to be based on a pentatonic scale, the ve tones
being called gong, corresponding to do in American musical notation; zhi:
sol; shang: re; yu: la; and jue: mi. Musicians soon realized that each of the ve
tones was related to the other tones by a single interval, which in Western
music is termed a fth: zhi was a fth above gong, shang a fth above zhi, yu
a fth above shang, and jue a fth above yu. The entire scale could be
generated by the numerical ratio of : in terms of the frequency of vibration.
That is to say, if the length of a string of a zither or a hollow bamboo tube of
a ute were shortened by one-third, it would produce a pitch one fth higher
than the rst, and so on. Since this ratio would extend over more than two
octaves, another way of producing tones within a single octave would be to
alternate between ratios of : and :. In a hypothetical construction, if we
started with a string or tube cm long producing a C, this would give four
other strings or tubes of (G), (D), (A), and (E) cm.
When an orchestra played together, it was necessary to tune this
pentatonic scale to a pitch standard (l), to adjust for the dierent instruments
that may not all have been made with the same lengths of strings or tubes. A
chapter of the Springs and Autumns of Mr. L called Ancient Music
attributes the discovery of dierent pitches to someone named Ling Lun, a
minister to the Yellow Emperor (Huang Di), who lived in the third
millennium BCE. It says that Ling Lun could distinguish the cries of
phoenixes, with the males producing six pitches and the females six other
pitches. The Yellow Emperor is then said to have ordered that a set of twelve
bells be cast to harmonize the ve tones according to these pitches. The
twelve pitches are called Wuyi (corresponding to A in the Western scale),
Yize (G), Ruibin (F), Guxi (E), Taicu (D) and Huangzhong (C) of the male
pitches, and Yingzhong (B), Nanl (A), Linzhong (G), Zhongl (F), Jiazhong
(D), and Dal (C) of the female pitches. These two sets of six pitches alternate
between the male and female pitches, one full tone apart in their order,
though the female pitches were considered subordinate to the male;
therefore, it was also common to speak in terms of just six pitches.
Needless to say, the story of Ling Lun producing these pitches from the
cries of phoenixes is a creation myth. Bells were not used in sets until the
ninth century BCE, and even then Western Zhou bell sets may not have
been based on the pentatonic scale, since they included only four tones per
octave, lacking shang: re. This does not necessarily mean that this earliest

#Music

music did not use a pentatonic scale; the bells doubtless provided the deep
structure of the music, and there may well have been other instruments,
such as pan-pipes and utes—as mentioned in the poem Blind Musicians—
that made use of the full scale. However, it is the case that the earliest
evidence of pitch standards does come from inscriptions on bells: sixty-four
bells found in the tomb of Lord Yi of Zeng. The inscriptions on these bells
provide a full set of musical notations for the tones the bells were capable of
playing; it is particularly interesting that while the notations conform to the
music of the state of Zeng, the inscriptions also provide translations of the
names of the tones in the dierent states of the time. The notes are indicated
as a relationship between the pitch and the tone; for instance, the notation
gong of guxi refers to a bell on which an A-tone produced a C-pitch. With
such a massive set of bells, they could play over three full octaves.
Music was not just correlated with nature; it was also seen to be in tune
with the politics of the time. One of the chapters of the Record of Ritual is
called the Record of Music. It begins by dierentiating between sounds
and notes and music, regarding music as the highest expression of human
relationships.
In general, musical notes are born from the hearts of humans. Music
connects human relationships. This is why the birds and beasts know
sounds but do not know musical notes, while the masses of people
know musical notes but do not know music. Only the gentleman is
able to know music.
The Record of Music continues by correlating the ve tones of the
pentatonic scale with social ranks: gong, the ruler; shang, the minister;
jue, the people; zhi, events; and yu, objects.
If the ve notes are not disordered, then there will be no dissonant
pitches. If gong is out of order, then there is chaos; it is because the
ruler is arrogant. If shang is out of order, then it is aslant; it is because
the ministers are corrupt. . . . If all ve tones are out of order, then they
intrude upon each other in turn; this is called lento. Like this, the state
will be lost in no time.
In the actual performance of music, gong, correlated with the ruler, was the
primary tone of a composition, the tonic from which the other four tones
would be generated and the main theme to which the piece would return

#Essays

after visiting the other tones. In theory, when music was performed properly,
it had the potential to transform society. The Confucian philosopher Xunzi
(c. –) wrote an Essay on Music in which he argued that music could
bring about harmony in the world.
When music proceeds, the will is claried; when ritual is rened,
conduct is perfected. The ears and eyes are discerning and bright, the
blood and qi harmonious and balanced. It changes the airs and alters
customs, and all under heaven is tranquil, the beautiful and good
delighting each other.
Harmony is a musical quality, but also a social quality. Confucius drew on
both senses to make one of his most famous sayings:
The Master said: The gentleman harmonizes but does not copy; the
petty man copies but does not harmonize.
A musical composition that played the same note over and over again would
not be beautiful music. So too, people just copying the behavior of others
makes for a boring—and ultimately disharmonious—society. Relations
work best when we each sound our own note, though set to the same key.