CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF MAESTRO KUANG

Maestro Kuang, also known as Zi Ye, lived in the state of Jin in the middle of
the sixth century. Blind from birth, he was famous as a musician, especially
as a player of the zither. While he has gone down in history as the patron
saint of musicians, his skills were by no means limited to just music. He
parlayed his closeness to the Jin rulers into a position as a high-ranking
ocer, remonstrating about government and divination, in addition to
comments about music. He is the subject of several stories in the Zuo
Tradition, and also in later texts of the Warring States and Han periods.
He rst came to the attention of the Jin court when Duke Ping of Jin
(r. –) cast a giant bronze bell, which all of the musicians at court
pronounced perfectly in tune. Only Maestro Kuang disagreed, saying that it
was out of tune. Subsequently, Maestro Juan from Qi arrived and
demonstrated that it was indeed out of tune. Other examples of his uncanny
ability to hear what others could not hear concern battles between Jin and its
neighbors. On one occasion, in , when the Jin army was about to do battle
with a much larger army from Qi, Maestro Kuang advised on the basis of
what he said were the joyous sounds of the birds that the Qi army was
actually in retreat; it turned out that this was in fact the case. Later in the
same year, when an army from Chu was attacking Jins neighbor Zheng,
Maestro Kuang again correctly recognized that Chu would withdraw, saying
that in his singing of the songs of the north and the songs of the south, he
could tell that there were sounds of mourning in the southern songs; again,
he was proven correct.
The latest episode in the Zuo Tradition in which Maestro Kuang gures
suggests just how sharp his mind was, and what a rm command he had of
history. In , a labor gang was working on a defense wall between Jin and
Qi. An old man joined the gang, since he was childless and needed to work.
When they broke for a meal, someone asked how old he was. The man said
that he was ignorant of such things as dates, but knew that he had been born

Biographies

on a jiazi day (day one of the sixty-day cycle) of the rst month, and that the
sixty-day cycle had repeated times, and was now a third of the way
through the next cycle. The deputy in charge ran o to ask about this at
court. Maestro Kuang immediately said: It was the year that Shuzhong
Huibo met with Que Chengzi at Chengkuang. In that year, the Di attacked
Lu, and Shusun Zhuangshu thereupon defeated the Di at Xian, capturing
Chang Di and Qiaoru, as well as Hui and Bao, for whom he named his sons.
It was seventy-three years ago. Thus, the old man was born in . This
corresponds to the eleventh year of Lord Wen of Lu (r. –), a year for
which the Springs and Autumns does in fact record such a meeting: In
summer, Shu Pengsheng (i.e., Shuzhong Huibo) met with Xi Que of Jin at
Chengkuang. Thus, not only was Maestro Kuangs skill at multiplication
accurate, but he named the exact year in the fashion of the time: by a great
event that happened in it.
Probably the most famous story of Maestro Kuangs musical knowledge
is recorded in several dierent books. It seems that one night while traveling
from his home state to a diplomatic visit to Jin, Lord Ling of Wi (r. –)
and his entourage was camped along the bank of the Pu River. During the
night, the lord heard the sounds of a zither being played. Since no one knew
what the song was, he asked his attendant Maestro Juan, the same musician
who had correctly identied the Jin bells as being out of tune, to transcribe
the song and to play it for him. When his entourage arrived in Jin and Duke
Ping entertained them at a banquet, Lord Ling instructed Maestro Juan to
play the song for Maestro Kuang. Before he had nished, Maestro Kuang
stopped him, saying that it was the sounds of a doomed country, composed
by a Maestro Yan at the end of the Shang dynasty for the debauched King
Zhu of Shang (r. 1086–1045). He explained that after King Wu of Zhou (r.
1049/1045–1043) defeated the Shang at the battle of Shepherds Wild (Muye),
Maestro Yan ed to the east, committing suicide by throwing himself into
the Pu River. He explained that the song that Lord Ling had heard must have
been played by the ghost of Maestro Yan. Against Maestro Kuangs advice,
Duke Ping of Jin insisted that Maestro Juan play the tune again. When he
had nished Duke Ping asked if he had played it in the most intense scale.
Maestro Kuang explained that Maestro Juan had played it in the clear shang
scale, but that this was not as intense as the clear zheng scale. Duke Ping
insisted that Maestro Kuang play it in that scale. Ordered to do so, before
Maestro Kuang had played the opening melody, sixteen black cranes
appeared from the south and perched on the top of the wall. As he continued,
they began to sing along and even to dance. Duke Ping was delighted with


Maestro Kuang

this and ordered Maestro Kuang to play it again in a dierent scale. Maestro
Kuang again objected, but was again overruled by the duke. When he began
to play it in the clear jue scale, clouds began to rise in the west. As he
continued, a storm began, the wind blowing the roof tiles o the palace.
After this, Duke Ping became sick and the state of Jin suered from three
years of drought.
It is through these supernatural musical skills that Maestro Kuang is most
famous, but he is also remembered for the sound political advice that he
gave to Duke Ping. In , when the dictatorial Lord Xian of Wi was
overthrown in a coup and forced to ee his state, Duke Ping expressed
concern that such conduct might spread to other states, including of course
his own. Maestro Kuangs response is one of Chinas earliest disquisitions on
the right of the people to determine their own fate. Eerily reminiscent of the
American Declaration of Independence, it is worth quoting almost in its
entirety.

The Lord of Jin said, In expelling their lord, have the people of Wi
not gone too far? Maestro Kuang said: Perhaps it is their lord who
really went too far. A good ruler will reward skill and punish excess,
will nurture the people like children, covering them like the heavens
and containing them like the earth, and then the people will support
their ruler, loving him like their father and mother, looking up to him
like the sun and the moon, respecting him like spiritual brightness and
being in awe of him like thunderbolts. Would it be possible to expel
him?
Now the ruler is the master of the spirits and the hope of the people. If
he ties up the peoples livelihood and diminishes the sacrices to the
spirits, and if the people lose hope and the spirits have no master, how
would they use him? What could they do but expel him! Heaven gives
birth to the people and established rulers for them, letting him oversee
and shepherd them, and not letting them lose their nature. There being
rulers, it makes assistants, having them teach and protect, but not
letting them go beyond the bounds. This is why the Son of Heaven has
dukes, why the many lords have chief ministers. . . . When they are
skillful, they are rewarded; when they are mistaken, they are corrected;
when they are troubled, they are rescued; when they are lost, they are
overthrown. From kings on down, everyone has fathers and siblings to
inspect their governance. Secretaries make the scriptures, blind music

Biographies

masters make the poetry, craftsmen chant the admonitions, the great
ocers instruct, the intellectuals pass on the sayings, commoners
complain, and merchants display their wares in the marketplace. . . .
Given Heavens love for the peoples suering, how could it let one man
be placed above the people, to indulge his own excess and reject the
nature of heaven and earth. It certainly would not be so.

One nal mention of the Maestro Kuang in the Zuo Tradition comes in
, when the ministers at the Jin court were contending with each other—
to the point of drawing swords against each other—over who should
represent Jin on a diplomatic mission to Qin. When Lord Ping approved of
this ghting among his ministers, Maestro Kuang simply but rmly
contradicted him: I fear that the ducal house will be brought down. Its
ministers are not competing with their hearts but contending with their
strength, are not striving for virtue but contending to be best. Since their
private interests are already excessive, is it possible that the house will not be
brought down!
While the state of Jin would survive for another century or more, six
dierent ministerial houses would do far more than draw swords against
each other; they would send armies against each other. Eventually, after a
protracted civil war, the once great state of Jin would be divided into three
smaller states. But Maestro Kuangs fame survives to the present day.