CHAPTER
HEREDITARY HOUSES OF THE
WESTERN PEOPLES

The vast areas in the west of present-day China, from Inner Mongolia in the
north, Xinjiang and Qinghai in the far west, Sichuan and the Tibetan Plateau
in the center, and Yunnan in the south, were largely terra incognita to the
people of ancient China. However, not only were these areas most certainly
not unpopulated wildernesses, each of them in its own way had enormous
inuence on the development of Chinese civilization. Indeed, without the
input of the western peoples, China would have been a far dierent place
than it was.
Just as peoples living along ancient Chinas eastern seaboard were referred
to generically as the Eastern Peoples (Dong Yi), often translated as Eastern
Barbarians, so too were the many peoples living in the west referred to
generically as Western Warriors (Xi Rong), also often translated as Western
Barbarians. In Chinas ancient historical period, the term Western Warriors
was most often used to refer to the semi-nomadic peoples inhabiting the
broad stretch of Central Asia from Mongolia in the north through western
Gansu and Qinghai, and it was these peoples who had the greatest inuence
on the development of Chinas classical civilization. Nevertheless, the west
was home to many other people, including many who were never mentioned
in Chinese historical sources, but who have now re-appeared through
archaeological discoveries.
It was once common to view civilization as having begun in the Ancient
Near East and to have radiated out from there. By the late nineteenth century,
theories of pan-Babylonian diusion had reached even China. In 1894,
Terrien de Lacouperie (1844–1894), a professor of comparative philology at
the University of London, published the book Western Origin of the Early
Chinese Civilization from , B.C. to A.D., in which he argued in the
late third millennium BCE, the Bak people, a tribe of Elamite descent,
wandered out of Chaldea and made its way to China, introducing some

Hereditary Houses

items of civilization to China. Surprisingly, two of Chinas greatest scholars
of the time, Zhang Taiyan (1869–1936) and Liu Shipei (1884–1919) accepted
the thesis that the Bak people were so named in China because they were
white (bai in modern Chinese, but the pronunciation of which was
something like *bak in the Han dynasty) and that the Yellow Emperor
(Huang Di), the mythological progenitor of the Chinese people, was so
called because of his blond hair. When, two decades later, archaeological
excavations at Anyang, Henan, the site of the last capital of the Shang dynasty,
revealed an advanced civilization with the earliest evidence of writing in
China, beautiful bronze vessels, and horse-drawn chariots, scholars in China
argued for an indigenous development of civilization in China, and these
early notions of diusion were dismissed as some of the worst examples of
imperialistic Orientalism, which in fact they were. Nevertheless, more recent
archaeological discoveries suggest that at least some of the key features of
Chinese civilization did come from the west, perhaps brought, at least in
part, by blond-haired peoples.
In the far west of what is today the Peoples Republic of China lies the
province of Xinjiang, the New Border, which became part of the Qing
empire only in the middle of the eighteenth century. The southern half of
Xinjiang is known as the Tarim Basin, which now forms the Taklamakan
Desert. Since the dry desert air is a natural preservative of organic material,
over the last twenty-ve years hundreds of naturally mummied human
remains have been found throughout the Tarim Basin, such as at Gumugou
(dated to about 2000 BCE), Xiaohe (1800) and Beifang (1700). Dating more
or less to the period of this book, about 2000 BCE to CE, these mummies,
many dressed in felt and woolen clothing similar to that worn in cultures
much further to the west, have attracted great attention because they are
clearly Caucasoid in appearance. One of these, known as the Beauty of
Xiaohe, was found in 2006. Although the young woman died almost four
thousand years ago, the extreme conditions of the desert have preserved and
mummied her body, so much so that her facial features and even her
reddish-brown hair and eyelashes are still to be seen.
Moving somewhat to the east of Xinjiang, one nds along the upper
Yellow River valley of western Gansu and eastern Qinghai provinces
hundreds of settlements of the Qijia Culture. Dating to just before and after
2000 BCE, this is the earliest Bronze Age culture in China, pre-dating the
Erlitou Culture. It has clear connections with the Seima-Turbino Complex, a
more or less contemporary Bronze Age culture widely distributed across
southern Siberia and the trans-Altai region. To the east, the Qijia Culture


The Western Peoples

also has demonstrable connections with the Erlitou Culture, unearthed in
the 1960s and 70s in Yanshi, Henan, just east of Luoyang. This culture features
the earliest bronze vessels cast in central China, and because the culture
largely coincides in time (roughly 1800–1600) and space (northern Henan
and southern Shanxi provinces) with the area that is supposed to have been
the homeland of the Xia dynasty, Chinese archaeologists and historians
routinely identify it with that dynasty. This connection has been suggested
too because of the myth that Yu the Great, the founding father of the Xia
dynasty, cast Nine Caldrons at the beginning of the dynasty. These caldrons,
symbolic of political power and legitimacy, were said to have been
transmitted from dynasty to dynasty, until they were eventually lost at the
end of the Zhou dynasty; images of the First Emperor of Qin trying to sh
them out of the Si River were a popular motif during the Han dynasty.
When the excavations at Anyang in the late 1920s and 1930s revealed a
mature Bronze Age culture, most archaeologists and historians—and
certainly most Chinese archaeologists and historians—turned away from
the diusionist theories that had been popular just a few decades earlier.
Nevertheless, with new discoveries of ever earlier bronze cultures far to the
west of central China, it is now almost certain that the idea of smelting ore
into molten metal—if not the casting of bronze itself—was certainly

Figure . Stone engraving of the First Emperor of Qin attempting to retrieve the
Caldrons of Yu from the Si River; from Jin shi suo (1821).

Hereditary Houses

imported from the west. This was perhaps the most consequential import,
though it was by no means the only one.
Another Bronze Age culture in western China that archaeologists in the
1930s, or even in the 1960s and 70s, could never have imagined was
unearthed in 1986 in Guanghan, Sichuan, just outside the modern city of
Chengdu. This was found at the site Sanxingdui. There is evidence that the
site was enclosed within a massive city wall, meters wide at the base.
Within the walls, archaeologists found two sacricial pits containing gold,
bronze, jade, and pottery artifacts, as wells as hundreds of ivory tusks from
elephants. While some of the bronze vessels at the site were similar to bronze
vessels seen in the more or less contemporary Erligang Culture of central
China, the culture usually associated with the early and middle portion of
the Shang dynasty, the gold masks and bronze statues from the site were
unlike anything seen theretofore in China. One colossal standing gure, in
particular, standing some seven feet high was unprecedented. However, the
culture seems to have disappeared without a trace soon after the city was
built about 1300. Nevertheless, it certainly reveals a very mature and
sophisticated culture, more than sixteen hundred kilometers to the southwest
of Luoyang.
Another eight hundred or more kilometers to the south would bring us
to the territory of the Dian Culture. Excavations at Shizhaishan, just south of
Kunming, Yunnan, in 1956 revealed yet another early bronze using culture,
dating roughly from the fth century through the end of the Western Han
dynasty. This culture, too, features bronzewares that are entirely unusual
within the Chinese cultural tradition. The most amazing of these bronzes are
drums, the covers of which have three-dimensional depictions of such
scenes as mounted warriors, hunting, tigers attacking oxen, or human
sacrices. These drums are closely connected with the Dong Son Culture of
Vietnam to the south.
While the cultures surveyed above almost certainly did not exist in
isolation, either from each other or from the various cultures of central
China, they were all completely unknown to traditional historians. However,
there were other peoples living to the west of China who loomed very large
in the consciousness of the Chinese of the time—and also thereafter. The
rst of these to appear in Chinese texts is the Devil Land, who are mentioned
in both the Classic of Changes as being engaged in warfare with the Shang
king Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189) and in the Bamboo Annals somewhat later in
the Shang dynasty. This name is almost certainly a generic term for all of the
non-Chinese peoples living along the middle course of the Yellow River, in


The Western Peoples

Figure . Lid of a bronze drum of the Dian Culture, c. BCE; photo by Zhou
Yuwei, used with permission.

the northern parts of Shaanxi and Shanxi provinces, and into Ningxia.
Although this name was still in use as late as the early Western Zhou dynasty,
seen for instance in the Xiao Yu ding inscription, which celebrates a Zhou
victory in which more than , prisoners were taken, by late in the
dynasty the name came to be replaced by two dierent names: Xianyun and
Dog Warriors (Quan rong). It is likely that these names refer to the same
people, Xianyun (the characters for which in standard Chinese script
feature the dog signic) doubtless being a transliteration of the name that
the people used for themselves, and Dog Warriors being a Chinese
translation of that name. By this time, these Dog Warriors were pressing into
the very heartland of the Western Zhou capital region in the Wei River valley,
as shown by many bronze inscriptions and poems in the Classic of Poetry. In
, they overran the capital and killed King You (r. –), the last king
of the Western Zhou, forcing the Zhou court to relocate eastwards. While
traditional Chinese historians explain the Zhou loss of the west by way of
domestic considerations (including especially the kings deposing of his
queen and the crown prince in favor of a secondary consort and her own
son), the intermittent warfare between the Dog Warriors and the Zhou over
the preceding half century suggests that more systemic forces were at play.
There are records that the Zhou homeland was suering from persistent

Hereditary Houses

drought at this time, and other suggestions that it was at this time that the
steppe-land of Central Asia was drying out, causing the pastoral peoples of
the zone to move about searching for new pastures. According to one
scenario, these peoples would have bumped into one after another, sort of
like billiard balls, leading nally to the Dog Barbarians bouncing into the
Zhou capital. Whatever the validity of this explanation, it is certain that
climate change had a profound eect on the people of the time.
The period from the eighth century through the fourth century BCE was
characterized by mature pastoralism—cattle herding—all across the steppe-
land of Central Asia, including the Northern Zone of China, a great arc
extending from Xinjiang, Gansu, Ningxia, Inner Mongolia, and also into the
mountainous regions of Shanxi and Hebei provinces. The peoples of these
areas closest to central China were generically known as hu, sometimes
specied as the Eastern Hu or Forest Hu, etc., or as di, a word that seems to
mean distant or far-o. They are often mentioned in Chinese histories,
alternately raiding the northern and western outposts of the Chinese states
or trading goods with them. Among their trade goods, perhaps the most
important were horses. Already from the earliest evidence of horses in
China—rst seen in the excavations of horse-drawn chariots at the Shang
dynasty site at Anyang, it is clear that both horses and chariots were imported
from areas to the west, ultimately from the trans-Caucasus region of present-
day Russia. The horse, in various applications, would soon become the most
important force in Chinese armies. It is known from Western Zhou bronze
inscriptions that battles between the Zhou and the Dog Warriors were
largely fought on chariots, and at least the rst half of the subsequent Springs
and Autumns period saw a high-tide of chariot warfare among the central
Chinese states. It was the nomadic peoples of Central Asia who rst gave up
their chariots in favor of riding astride on their horses, which is not at all the
natural act that movie Westerns would seem to depict. In central China, it
was not until that King Wuling of Zhao (r. –) decreed that the
Zhao army would deploy a cavalry division dressed in Hu clothing,
essentially a matter of wearing pants. Prior to this time, ocers led troops
into battle in chariots and dressed in formal court robes. Although this
reform met with resistance from many of the military ocers, it was soon
imitated by all of the other major powers.
From this time on, the central Chinese states came to be more and more
intimately aware of the nomadic peoples of Central Asia. In addition to
defending against them with their own cavalry forces, the northern-most of
the Chinese states—Qin, Zhao and Yan—began to build walls along their


The Western Peoples

northern borders. At the same time that Qin was conquering all of the
Chinese states, it was also expanding northwards, colonizing the Ordos
region of northern Shaanxi and Ningxia in . This in turn caused
dislocation among the peoples living there, now known as the Xiongnu,
often regarded as genetically related to the Huns who invaded Europe six
hundred years later. In , the Xiongnu leader Maodun (r. –) killed
his father Touman and unied the various tribes into a confederation that
would go on to be a powerful counterforce to the Han dynasty, the Chinese
successor to the short-lived Qin dynasty. But that is a story for a later history.



BIOGRAPHIES