CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF WEI

The hereditary house of Wei, one of the three states into which the great state
of Jin had divided in , ostensibly traced its heritage back to one Bi Gao, a
gure who took part in the Zhou conquest of Shang and was subsequently
awarded rule of a local territory at Bi, located just to the southwest of the
Zhou capital at present-day Xian, Shaanxi. Although Bi Gao continued to
serve the Zhou kings Cheng (r. 1042/1035–1006) and Kang (r. 1005–),
and a command to him was even preserved as one of the chapters in the
Exalted Scriptures, the Records of the Historian suggests that his descendants
lost their land and ended up living among the northern barbarians.
Inscribed bronze vessels from the Western Zhou period suggest that this is
not true at all, and that the Bi family retained considerable inuence
throughout the entire period. In 1966, a pair of early bronze gui-tureens that
were cast for Bi Gong himself to commemorate an award made to him by
one of these early Zhou kings was discovered in the Zhou homeland at
Qishan, and numerous other vessels from throughout the entirety of the
Western Zhou have been discovered over the centuries. One, the Yu Hu ding,
discovered in 1992, suggests that the Bi family was still located just to the
south of the capital.
On the other hand, the most recent discoveries suggest that the Bi family
was also active further to the east of the Zhou capital. In 2006, several vessels
were discovered in Jiang County, Shanxi, the inscriptions of which record
that a Bi daughter had been married to the ruler of a state called Peng,
thought to have been a non-Zhou state located there. More recently still, in
2007 a ding-caldron cast by a Ke the Elder of Bi was unearthed at Liangdaicun,
along the north-south stretch of the Yellow River in eastern Shaanxi. The
vessel was cast either at the very end of the Western Zhou or perhaps after
the Zhou western capital had been lost, and was dedicated to his high
ancestor who had received the mandate, Duke Bi. It is unclear whether this
means that the Bi family had ties throughout the middle Yellow River valley,

Hereditary Houses

or if they moved east along with the Zhou kings only at the very end of the
Western Zhou period. In any event, traditional histories pick up the story of
the Bi family again in , when a gure named Bi Wan is said to have ridden
in the chariot of Duke Xian of Jin (r. –), serving as his spearman.
Duke Xian defeated three small states located in the Fen River valley of
Shanxi province: Huo, Geng and Wei, and awarded rule of Wei to Bi Wan in
recognition of his service. A diviner at the court of Duke Xian predicted that
the descendants of Bi Wan would certainly become very great, since his
name Wan means , or a myriad, while Wei means lofty. Bi Wans
own divination about whether to serve the Jin lords or not was also
auspicious, indicating that he would certainly prosper. In fact, Wei would
become one of the greatest states of the Warring States period. This probably
does not mean that this prediction and divination were prescient; instead,
they were probably created after the fact to explain the rise of the state.
Nevertheless, Bi Wans descendants did become great.
When Duke Xian died a decade later and control of Jin descended into
chaos among his many sons, Bi Wan threw his support to Chonger, who
would eventually become duke: Duke Wen of Jin (r. –). From their
base in Wei, Bi Wan and his descendants would continue to be among the six
ministers serving the Jin rulers for more than a century. Toward the end of
the sixth century, power in the state shifted decisively away from the Jin
rulers themselves and toward these six ministers. In , their positions as
heads of government were formalized by Duke Qing (r. –). Over the
next two generations, Wei would make common cause with Zhao and Han,
two of the other six ministers, to attack the other three: Fan, Zhonghang and
Xun. In , ghting among these local powers would drive Duke Chu
(r. –/) into exile, with dierent factions supporting dierent
pretenders to rule. This strife culminated in , when Wei, Zhao and Han
would join together to annihilate Xun, killing its leader Zhibo, who had been
the power behind Duke Chu. The three lineages divided up his territory and
control of Jin eectively passed to them. This year is often seen as the
beginning of the Warring States period.
The beginning of Wei history as an independent state properly begins
with Lord Wen of Wei (r. –), during whose long reign Wei consolidated
its power as the preeminent of the three states. Although Jin had eectively
divided into the three states of Wei, Zhao and Han, Lord Wen succeeded
for the most part in keeping the three states working in concert with each
other. Wei, in particular, became the most powerful state in north China,
attacking Qin to the west and reclaiming the fertile land to the west of the


Wei

Yellow River that Jin had lost to Duke Mu of Qin (r. –). At this time,
Wei even attacked the non-Chinese state of Zhongshan to the east of the
Taihang Mountains in present-day Hebei province. In , Lord Wen
achieved his greatest success. In that year, the state of Yue, which was a rising
power in southeastern China, agreed to a treaty with the northern states of
Qi and Lu to counter the power of the Jin states. To celebrate this treaty, the
ruler of Yue visited Lu, where a triumphal parade was staged, with him riding
in a chariot driven by the lord of Lu and assisted by the lord of Qi. Oended
by this, Lord Wen of Wei, joined by the other two Jin states, and entering the
long wall there attacked Qi, defeating Duke Kang of Qi (r. –). This
victory is noteworthy for three dierent reasons. First, the reference to the
Wei, Zhao and Han armies passing through a long wall in both a
contemporary bronze inscription, the Biao Qiang zhong, and also in the
recently discovered Tsinghua manuscript Annals, is the rst reference in any
Chinese literature to what would become the Great Wall of China. Second,
the allied Jin armies signed two separate treaties acknowledging Qis defeat:
one with Duke Kang of Qi, who would be the last ruler of Qis original ruling
family, and one with Tian He, the leader of the family that would supplant
the ruling family and go on to rule Qi for the next years. Third, the Jin
allies then went on to present the Qi captives to the king of Zhou, King
Weilie (r. –); the king then recognized the the rulers of Wei, Zhao and
Han as lords (hou). This marked the end of the state of Jin, which had
survived and prospered for more than six centuries, even though several of
the centuries were wracked by civil war.
Lord Wen is looked back upon by Chinese historians as a particularly
capable ruler, doubtless because in reforming the government he entrusted
the reforms to three capable ministers: Li Kui (–), Wu Qi (–),
and Ximen Bao (dates unknown). While the contributions these men made
in Wei have been overshadowed in the grand sweep of Chinese history by
more illustrious ministers in other states, they all played important roles, not
only in making Wei the strongest state of its time, but also in showing the
way for other states to become strong. If Shang Yang (d. ), who in the
middle of the fourth century would become chief minister in Qin, is usually
regarded as the father of the school of thought called Legalism and the
administrative and economic reforms associated with it, Li Kui should be
regarded as its grandfather. Indeed, in the earliest bibliography of Chinese
literature, a book bearing the name Li Kui and said to have been written by
him, comes at the very beginning of the section on Legalism. His economic
theory stressed the importance of agriculture, and especially the role of the

Hereditary Houses

single family as the basic unit of production. He urged that land be measured
in standard sized plots to maximize tax income while still allowing sucient
income for the peasants to live. While an echo of his agricultural policy
would be heard in the reforms instituted by Shang Yang in Qin, it is also
possible to see in it the famous well-eld policy mentioned in the work of
Mencius (c. –). This well-eld policy takes its name from the Chinese
character for well: ; it is said to describe a land management system in
which eight households would individually till their own separate plots,
those around the perimeter of the square, but would join together to till the
central square, the harvest of which would be paid to the state as a tax. Li Kui
is also said to have written a book on the law: the Classic of Law. Although
the book has not survived, descriptions of it suggest that it was the rst
extended code intended to ensure civil security. It was organized in six
separate sections: bandits, brigands, prisons, arrests, miscellaneous
punishments, and extenuating circumstances. Shang Yang is said to have
taken a copy of this Classic of Law with him when he went to Qin, and it is
clear that it inuenced the development of law there, and through that also
law throughout later Chinese history.
Wu Qi is ranked together with the earlier Sun Wu (c. –), better
known as Sunzi, as the two great military geniuses of ancient China; indeed,
their names are often linked as Sun Wu (Wu being Wu Qis surname, a
dierent character from Sun Wus given name). He was originally from the
old state of Wi (not to be confused with this state of Wei), located in the
northeastern part of present-day Henan province, but at a young age
commanded the Wei army in its reconquest of the area to the west of the
Yellow River, over which he was given control. After making a name for
himself in Wei, he moved on to the southern state of Chu, where he also
achieved great success, but also made numerous enemies. It was there that he
was assassinated. Two anecdotes about him in the later military classic Wei
Liaozi illustrate well his military philosophy. The rst says that on the eve of
a battle, his ocers oered Wu Qi a sword; he rejected it, saying To command
the troops and direct their blades is the role of the commander; to wield a
single sword is not his role. The second says that at the battle, he ordered his
army to await his command to attack. One bravo, unable to restrain himself,
rushed out and attacked the enemy line, killing two men with whose heads
he returned to his own lines. Wu Qi ordered that he be executed for having
disobeyed the original order. This second anecdote recalls a story about
Sunzi, who the King of Wu tested by ordering that he train his harem. When
the women of the harem repeatedly failed to follow orders, Sunzi ordered


Wei

that the kings favorite two consorts be executed for failing to instill discipline.
Although the king was dismayed with this order, Sunzi insisted that it be
carried out. Afterwards the women of the harem obeyed every order without
hesitation. These anecdotes are doubtless much embellished, but they have
long been used to explain the important role of the commander in Chinese
military theory.
Ximen Bao, the third of Lord Wens principal advisers, was in charge of
important infrastructure projects, especially the building of a network of
twelve canals that were used especially for irrigation, bringing the water of
the Yellow River to the area of southwest Shanxi, the heartland of Wei,
making it the most fertile land of the time. The irrigation network was still
in use during the Han dynasty, some three hundred years later, at which time
it was said of him that his name was known to all under heaven and his
moisture owed to later generations.
Lord Wen is also famous for being a friend and patron to such paragons
of virtue and learning as Zi Xia (b. ), Tian Zifang (c. –) and Duan
Ganmu (c. –). Zi Xia, famous as the most scholarly of Confuciuss
personal disciples, was in turn the teacher of Li Kui, Wu Qi and Ximen Bao.
Tian Zifang is said to have been Lord Wens teacher of philosophy, while
Duan Ganmu resisted almost every attempt to draw him into the government,
but through that became ever more famous. Still, his friendship with Lord
Wen contributed to the lords success. It is said that in , a Qin army was
about to attack Wei, when a Qin adviser reminded the duke of Qin of Duan
Ganmus presence in Wei; Qin withdrew its army in recognition of Duans
virtue.
Lord Wen died in , and was succeeded by his son Ziji, better known as
Lord Wu, the Martial Lord, of Wei (r. –). Despite the posthumous
name by which he is known, not only was his short reign not marked by
any notable military successes, he seems to have been defeated in every
battle that he led. What is more, the alliance that his father had achieved
with Zhao and Han, the other two successor states of Jin, would dissolve
under Lord Wu. For instance, in , Zhao joined with Chu, Jins old
nemesis now under the command of none other than Wu Qi, Weis former
general, to attack Wei; Zhao occupied much of eastern Wei, while Chu took
all of its territories south of the Yellow River. This alliance between Zhao and
Chu would introduce a new form of diplomacy and military alliances, in
which countries would join together temporarily to gain one advantage or
another, knowing full well that some years later they might very well be
enemies.

Hereditary Houses

Another failure of Lord Wu was his failure to name a successor prior to
his death. He had two sons, the elder named Ying, and younger Gongzi
Huan. After Lord Wus death, Gongzi Huan went to Zhao to enlist its aid in
installing him. Han joined together with Zhao to take advantage of the
succession crisis in Wei to invade, dealing the Wei army a crippling defeat
and taking Ying prisoner. Despite this initial success, the two states disagreed
over how to proceed. Zhao wanted to kill Ying, and make Huan the puppet
ruler, while Han argued that killing Ying would cause the people of Wei to
regard them as butchers, and thought it best to let the two brothers divide
the state between them. In fact, when the two allies withdrew their armies,
Ying was released, killed his younger brother, and became lord of Wei,
known to history as Lord Huicheng of Wei (r. –), or better known by
his subsequent title King Hui of Liang (r. –). His lengthy reigns were
marked by numerous notable events, making him arguably the most famous
of all leaders of the Warring States period.
Lord Huicheng had a checkered career as a military leader, with some
notable victories but also many defeats. His achievements as a political
strategist were more positive. In , he moved the capital of the state from
Anyi, in the western part of the state along the north-south stretch of the
Yellow River far to the east at Daliang, south-southeast of present-day Kaifeng,
Henan; this had the eect of taking it out of danger from attacks by Qin, and
to place the capital in the very center of the north China plain. In the next
year, he opened the Wild-Goose Canal, linking the Yellow River near present-
day Zhengzhou with the Huai River in Anhui province; to the northeast, it
also connected with the Ji River of Shandong province. This had the eect of
connecting all of the major rivers of the region, and was a precursor of the
Grand Canal that linked the Yellow River and the Yangzi River that was
completed almost a thousand years later. From this time on, the state was
often referred to as Liang rather than Wei. At this time too, he also exchanged
several cities with Zhao and Han, having the eect of consolidating Wei
territory and making it easier to govern and easier to defend. He also engaged
in numerous meetings with rulers of other states. For him, this culminated in
his declaration of kingship in , which the other states recognized.
Thereafter, he reigned for sixteen years as King Hui of Liang.
King Hui is now perhaps best remembered as the patron of the famous
Confucian philosopher Mencius, who visited his court very late in his reign
and whose book features several notable conversations between the two
men. One of the more memorable of these conversations provides insight
into both men.


Wei

King Hui of Liang said, My attitude towards my country is to put all
of my heart into it. If the area Within the River has a famine, I move
the people to the area East of the River and move its grain to Within
the River, and if the area East of the River has a famine I do likewise.
When I examine the governors of neighboring states, there is none as
conscientious as I am, yet the populations of those states dont decrease
while mine doesnt increase. Why is this?
Mencius replied, Milord loves warfare, so let me illustrate it with
warfare. Exuberantly drumming the men into battle, if once the
weapons have crossed your men throw away their armor and dragging
their weapons run o, some running a hundred paces and stopping,
while others stop after fty paces. How would it be if those who ran
fty paces laughed at those who had run a hundred?
That wouldnt be OK! Just because they didnt run a hundred
paces, they too ran o.
Mencius said, If Milord understands this, then dont look for your
people to be more numerous than those of your neighbors.

In fact, in all ve of the conversations between King Hui and Mencius,
King Hui comes o as a vain man, singularly concerned with his public
image. While these conversations were clearly intended to show o Menciuss
perspicacity and wit, it probably does not get King Hui too wrong. After
King Hui died, in , Mencius stayed on to advise his son, known as King
Xiangai (r. –), but left shortly thereafter, explaining that the king
does not look like a ruler and there is nothing in him that inspires awe. It
has not helped King Xiangais historical reputation that Sima Qian in
Records of the Historian completely mistook his identity, dividing him
into two separate kings, the rst, King Xiang, being confused with the
sixteen-year reign of his father as king, and a second, a King Ai, whose
twenty-three-year reign was actually that of King Xiangai. Perhaps it is just
as well since his reign was marked by no great accomplishments. Instead,
there was a great deal of back and forth ghting and negotiation with Qin,
but to no real eect.
The situation only deteriorated during the reign of his son, King Zhao (r.
–). During the rst nine years of his reign, Records of the Historian
records defeat after defeat at the hands of Qin.

In King Zhaos rst year, Qin plucked our Xiang City. In the second
year, we fought with Qin, but it did not benet us. Third year, we aided

Hereditary Houses

Han to attack Qin, but the Qin general Bai Qi defeated our army of
, men at Yique. In the sixth year, we gave Qin four square miles
of our area East of the River. Mang Mao tricked us. Seventh year, Qin
plucked sixty-one of our cities large and small. Eighth year, King Zhao
of Qin became the Western Emperor and King Min of Qi became the
Eastern Emperor, though a month later they both resumed using the
title of king. In the ninth year, Qin plucked our cities Yuan and
Quyang.

During the reign of his son, King Anxi (r. –), the situation did not
improve. In , Wei suered the indignity of being attacked by Qi from the
north and Chu from the south, having to request aid from their old enemy
Qin. Qin provided the aid, since it did not want Weis territory and riches to
fall into the hands of its rivals Qi and Chu. The last two kings of Wei, King
Jingmin (r. –) and his son Wang Jia (r. –), did not fare any
better. In , Wei was one of the rst of the old states to fall completely to
Qin, being incorporated into the growing Qin empire as a single prefecture.
There is probably no single lesson to learn from the history of this
hereditary house other than that all such houses eventually fall. It is not a
bad lesson to remember.