CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF QU YUAN AND
SONG YU

Qu Yuan, originally named Qu Ping, was the scion of a noble family of the
state of Chu, and served at the court of King Huai of Chu (r. –) as
Great Ocer of the Three Wards, taking part in debates before the king
and engaging in diplomacy with foreign visitors. However, according to his
biography in Records of the Historian, Qu Yuan was the target of jealousy and
slander at court, such that King Huai came to have suspicions about him. Sad
that the king should so easily discount his talents and contributions, he
composed the poem Encountering Sorrow to express his thoughts, and
then afterward committed suicide by drowning himself in the Miluo River.
In , Chu was caught up in an inter-state intrigue involving most of the
major states of the time. At that time, the western state of Qin was planning
to attack the northeastern state of Qi, which was then allied with Chu. Prior
to launching its attack, Qin feared that Chu would come to its allys defense.
Therefore, it sent the famous adviser and strategist Zhang Yi (d. ) to go to
Chu and promise King Huai that if Chu would not go to the aid of Qi, Qin
would cede to it li of territory. When Chu did in fact break its alliance
with Qi and asked for the promised territory, Zhang Yi then claimed that he
had said li of territory, not . Double-crossed, King Huai sent an army to
attack Qin, but the Chu army suered a serious defeat at Danyang, in present-
day northwestern Hubei province. King Huai then mobilized the entire state
to invade Qin, reaching as far as Lantian, just to the east of modern Xian and
the site where the First Emperor of Qin (r. /–) would eventually be
buried together with the famous terracotta warriors. With the Chu army out
of the country, the state of Wei took the opportunity to invade Chu, reaching
as far as Deng in central Henan. The Chu attacking Qin had to withdraw to
meet this threat, especially since its erstwhile ally Qi refused to come to its
aid. Throughout these events, Qu Yuan was an outside observer, having been
sent away from his home state to serve as a Chu ambassador in Qi.

Biographies

Some ten years later, another inter-state intrigue took place again
involving Chu and Qin, but this time as ostensible allies. King Zhao of Qin
(r. –) invited King Huai to a wedding ceremony in Qin. Qu Yuan, who
had since returned to Chu, urged him not to go, arguing that Qin was never
to be trusted, saying Qin is a kingdom of tigers and wolves, and is
untrustworthy. King Huai refused to accept his advice. When he arrived in
Qin, he was detained there and asked to make territorial concessions to Qin.
He refused and eventually died in captivity in Qin.
Regarding Qu Yuan himself, most of what can be said derives from his
own writing—or at least from the author of the poem Encountering Sorrow,
which is included in the Verses of Chu. Encountering Sorrow opens with a
sort of autobiographical statement, suggesting that Qu Yuan was not only
high born, but also very satised with himself.

Descendant of Thearch Gao Yang, My august father was named Bo
Yong.
The calendar pointed at the rst month of the year, It was on
gengyin that I descended.
The August Surveyor took my rst measure, Awarding me a ne
name.
Naming me Upright Model, Nicknaming me Numinous Balance.
Having bequeathed me this inner beauty, He added to it renement
and ability.

The poem is far too long to quote in its entirety. The following two sections
give some sense of the contents. The rst speaks of Qu Yuans situation at
court, and his looking to the past for his moral norms. Peng and Xian were
two famous ancient magicians—usually referred to as shamans. Because of
this, Encountering Sorrow is often regarded as a poem about a shamanic
spirit ight, perhaps even one taken under the inuence of some
hallucinogenic drug. While such drugs were certainly used in ancient China,
it seems possible also to read the poem as a political metaphor.

Truly I have modeled myself on those in the past who were rened,
Not what the vulgar of the world admire.
I am not at one with the people of today, Preferring to rely on the
norms passed down by Peng and Xian.
Long do I sigh and brush away my tears, Sorry for the many troubles
the people have in life.


Qu Yuan and Song Xing

Although I love to get made up I took on bit and bridle, Cursed by
morning and replaced at night.
They replaced me for wrapping myself in orchids, Which I extended
with angelica.
It being indeed the love of my heart, Even if I were to die nine times
Id have no regrets.
I resent the Numinous Reners excessiveness, In the end not taking
account of the peoples hearts.
The many women envy me my moth eyebrows, Singing satires that
I am good at sex.
Certainly this is a trick of the times, Turning the straight and
narrow on their head.
Turning their backs on the plumb-line to chase the crooked,
Competing in beauty as their measure.
Bereft and in despair, I am alone and exhausted, bound to these times.
I would rather drown and oat away, Unable am I to bear this
attitude.
That raptors dont ock together, Has been a certainty since early
times.
How can you t a square peg into a round hole, How can you be
content with those holding to a dierent path!
Bending ones heart and repressing ones ambition, Bearing the
hurts and accepting the insults,
Bowing down to the clear and white to die for what is right, Is
certainly what the ancient sages held dear.

The second passage to consider, the very end of the poem, describes a
little of his ight—certainly an imaginary ight on dragon-borne chariots—
seeking a place where he might t in, but concludes with his uncertainty
about leaving home.

In the morning I set out for the Heavenly Ford, In the evening arriving
at the Western Limit.
With phoenix wings the supporting ags, High we soared row
upon row.
Suddenly I traveled over these Flowing Sands, Following the Red
River and idled there.
Waving to the water dragons to bridge the ford, I summoned the
Western August One to take me across.

Biographies

The road being long with many diculties, I roused the host of
chariots and had them wait by the path:
Passing by Incomplete Mountain and turning left, I pointed out the
Western Sea as where we would meet.
I massed my chariots a thousand teams, Jade axles racing forward
in a line,
I hitched the eight dragons bobbing and weaving, Riding the sinews
of the cloud ags.
Repressing my will to slow down, My spirit raced high into the
distance.
Singing the Nine Songs and dancing the Shao, I approached the sun
joyously.
Rising up to the climax of the performance, Suddenly I looked
down upon my old hometown.
The driver was sad and my horses sensed it, Twisting their necks
they would not go on.

The coda says: Enough already!
The state is without men yet no one recognizes me, So why should
I feel for my former city!
Not enough here for a beautiful government, Ill go along to the
home of Peng and Xian.

With his one-time patron, and sometime critic, King Huai dying in Qin, Qu
Yuan apparently had no road forward in his home state of Chu. According to
at least one source, in the third year of King Huais successor, King Qingxiang
(r. –; i.e., ), Qu Yuan threw himself into the Miluo River, becoming
in that act one of the most famous suicides in Chinese history.
Qu Yuans most famous disciple, or perhaps just imitator, was Song Yu. His
dates are unknown, but the biography of Qu Yuan in Records of the Historian
places him after the death of Qu Yuan, and some sources show him as active
during the reign of King Qingxiang; i.e., the rst half of the third century. At
least two of the poems included in the collection Verses of Chu are credited
to Song Yu: the Nine Discriminations and Summoning the Soul, and his
name is often mentioned together with that of Qu Yuan as Qu and Song.
Several of the poems credited to him have some context attributed to their
writing, showing that Song Yu, like Qu Yuan before him, was the victim of
court intrigue. It seems that he was extremely handsome, making him the
victim of considerable jealousy. One of the poems credited to him, Criticism


Qu Yuan and Song Xing

Rhymeprose, has a colophon that states that Tang Le, another of the poets of
the time often mentioned together with Song Yu as followers of Qu Yuan,
accused him of seducing King Qingxiangs daughter: Song Yu is handsome
and clever with words, but while serving your majesty, he has been making
love to your daughter. Your majesty must keep him at a distance.
The most famous poem credited to Song Yu is entitled The High Path
Rhymeprose. It too begins with an introductory colophon setting the
context. It describes one of the most famous daydreams of the Chinese
literary tradition.

In the past, King Xiang of Chu and Song Yu were walking on
Clouddream Terrace, looking o to the High Path Observatory, on top
of which the vapor of a cloud was rising straight up. Suddenly it
changed in appearance and in an instant transformed ceaselessly. The
king asked Song Yu: What kind of vapor is this? Yu answered: This
is what is called Morning Cloud. The king said: Whats that? Yu
said: Once upon a time in the past, when the former king walked the
High Path, he was being lazy and took a nap during the day. He dreamt
that he saw a girl, who said: I am the girl of Magic Mountain, the guest
of the High Path. When I heard that milord was walking the High
Path, I thought to oer him my pillow and mat. With that, the king
favored her. When he left, he made a verse saying: I was on the sunny
side of Magic Mountain, the summit of High Mound. At dawn, I
become Cloud Vapor; in the evening, I make it rain. Mornings and
evenings beneath Sunny Terrace. At dawn, he saw her as she had said,
so he set up a temple called Morning Vapor.
The king asked: When Cloud Vapor rst comes out, what form
does it take? Yu replied: When it rst comes out, its as luxuriant as a
copse of pine trees. When you get a little closer, she shines like a
beautiful girl who shields her face from the sun when gazing at her
lover. Suddenly transformed, shes as swift as a chariot team of four
horses, feather ags ying. Then shes as chilly as the wind, dreary as
the rain. When the wind stops and the rain clears, the cloud is gone.
The king asked: Can I now go there? Yu said: OK. The king said:
Whats it like? Yu said: High and open, it looks o into the distance;
broad and expansive, its the ancestor of the ten thousand things.
Above, it belongs to the heavens; below, it plumbs the depths. So
marvelous and strange that it cannot be told. The king said: Try to
sing of it for me. Yu said: OK, OK.

Biographies

Another version of this colophon says that the girls spirit attached itself to a
divine mushroom, which when eaten worked as an aphrodisiac; whoever ate
it, would meet her in a dream.
It is all but impossible here to give an indication of the verse Song Yu is
supposed to have created for the occasion. Here is just a brief passage
describing the birds of the Magic Mountain, how they sport and sing to each
other—surely, we are meant also to hear the song of the poet in their songs.

Flocks of sparrows twitter-twitter, Hen and cock losing themselves in
each other, Mournfully calling back and forth.
Osprey and oriole, Just-at-dusk and Chu dove, Cuckoo and
Long-for Wife, Long-tailed pheasants in a high nest.
Their calling is happy and gay, Sporting throughout the year.
Singing back and forth in harmony, Melodies following the stream.