
CHAPTER 38
BIOGRAPHIES OF LUZI SHENG AND THE
THREE HUMANE MEN OF SHANG

Luzi Sheng, also known as Wangzi (Prince) Sheng, Wangzi Lufu, and
posthumously by the temple name Wu Geng, is reputed to have been the
son of Di Xin, the last king of the Shang dynasty. When Di Xin was killed in
the course of the Zhou conquest of Shang, Luzi Sheng became the titular
leader of the Shang people. There is conﬂicting evidence of what happened
after the conquest. The standard account in later historical sources, such as
Records of the Historian, says that two or three younger brothers of King Wu
of Zhou—Guanshu, Caishu, and perhaps Huoshu—were deputed to the
Shang capital area to serve as “overseers” of the Shang people. According to
these accounts, when King Wu died suddenly just two years after the
conquest, yet another royal brother, the Duke of Zhou, who had remained in
the Zhou homeland, declared himself to be in charge of the Zhou government.
The brothers overseeing the Shang regarded this as a usurpation on the
Duke of Zhou’s part, and joined together with Luzi Sheng and the Shang
people to rebel against the Duke of Zhou. However, their revolt was
unsuccessful. The Duke of Zhou, together with yet another half-brother,
Grand Protector Shi, the Duke of Shao, led a second conquest campaign,
suppressing the revolt, and killed Wu Geng and at least one of the royal Zhou
brothers.
This standard account is so entrenched in the minds of most historians
that it is hard to imagine a diﬀerent scenario. And yet a recently unearthed
manuscript, called by its editors the Annals, does suggest just such a diﬀerent
scenario. It states:
After King Wu of Zhou had conquered the Shang, he sent the three
overseers to the Shang capital. When King Wu died, the Shang city
rose in rebellion, killing the three overseers and establishing Luzi
Sheng.

Biographies

This suggests that the three younger brothers of King Wu were killed by the
Shang people they were sent to oversee, and implies at least that Luzi Sheng
took command of them in actuality. Other evidence that has been unearthed
would seem to be consistent with Luzi Sheng taking over the governance of
the post-conquest Shang people, if only brieﬂy. The Tai Bao gui, a beautiful
bronze vessel that was commissioned by Grand Protector Shi and that is
now in the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., bears an inscription
that begins:
The king attacked Luzi Sheng, suppressing his rebellion. The king sent
down a campaign command to the Grand Protector. The Grand
Protector was able to be respectful and without ﬂaw.8
The “king” of this inscription is almost certainly the young King Cheng, who
succeeded his father King Wu after Wu’s death. According to this inscription,
it was King Cheng and Grand Protector Shi who put down Luzi Sheng’s
revolt. That the inscription does not mention the Duke of Zhou, said in most
traditional historical accounts to have led the campaign against the revolt,
does not mean that he did not participate in it, but it does at least call into
question his leadership of the campaign.
Other inscribed bronze vessels seem to have been cast for Luzi Sheng
himself. One late Shang-dynasty or early-Western Zhou bronze is made for
a “Luzi” and dedicated to a “Father Ding.” If this Luzi is Luzi Sheng, it too
would call into question one of the important aspects of the traditional
biography of Luzi Sheng. That biography stresses that Luzi Sheng was the
son of Shang king Zhòu, the king defeated and killed by King Wu of Zhou.
The Shang kings were all known posthumously not by their given name, but
rather by the day of the ten-day week on which they received sacriﬁces. King
Zhòu is invariably known as Di Xin, xin being the eighth of the ten days. On
the other hand, the Luzi Sheng gong inscription says that Luzi Sheng’s father
received sacriﬁces on the day ding, the fourth day of the week. Thus, he could
not have been King Zhòu’s own son. However, his status as a “prince”
indicates that he was some king’s son.
That Luzi Sheng was named by the Zhou conquerors to be the titular
head of the Shang people would seem to attest to his senior status among
that people. Three other ﬁgures, traditionally referred to as the “Three
Humane Men of Shang,” might otherwise have had some claim to that
leadership role. These were Jizi Xuyu, Bizi Gan, and Weizi Qi. According to
later historical sources both Jizi Xuyu and Bizi Gan were sons of Shang king


Luzi Sheng and The Three Humane Men of Shang

Wen Ding, the grandfather of King Zhòu such that Jizi and Bizi were the
king’s uncles, while Weizi Qi is supposed to have been a son of King Di Yi,
King Zhòu’s father, such that he was King Zhòu’s brother or half-brother
(indeed, perhaps even an elder brother, albeit by a secondary consort). The
reason that these three ﬁgures are known as the Three Humane Men of
Shang is that they are supposed to have remonstrated against King Zhòu’s
misrule, though to no avail. Indeed, all three of them suﬀered for their
attempts. Bizi is said to have been executed on King Zhòu’s order (in a
particularly gruesome manner, having his heart cut out), Weizi was sent into
exile, and Jizi was imprisoned in the Shang capital. According to the famous
Shi Qiang pan bronze vessel, the inscription of which recounts a sketch
history of the ﬁrst seven kings of Western Zhou, Weizi’s descendants moved
to the Zhou homeland and became hereditary scribes to the Zhou kings. As
for the third of the three humane men, Jizi, traditional histories say that he
did outlive King Zhòu. According to those accounts, when King Wu of Zhou
defeated the army of King Zhòu at the battle of Shepherd’s Wild, one of his
ﬁrst actions upon entering the Shang city was to send Grand Protector Shi to
release Jizi from prison.
The biography of Jizi just barely begins with his release from prison upon
the Zhou conquest of Shang. Again, according to later traditions, rather than
being grateful for his release, he was ashamed to be in the debt of the enemy
of his people. For this reason, he attempted to go into exile far to the north
of the Shang capital. When King Wu heard this, he appointed Jizi to be the
ruler of this land, to be known as Chaoxian or, as it is better known, at least
in Korea, Chosŏn. With this, Jizi, or as he has come to be known in Korea,
Kija, has come to be seen as the founding father of Korea. Needless to say,
this attribution is very much tied to nationalistic sentiments, with Chinese
sources from the Han dynasty using it to claim Korea for the Chinese state,
and Korean sources, much later, to be sure, using it to claim the great
antiquity of the Korean state, especially as opposed to that of Japan. While
many modern historians, including also Korean historians, viewed the story
of Jizi or Kija as a fairy tale, a modern archaeological discovery has caused
many of them to reconsider. In the 1970s, many bronze vessels were
unearthed in the Daling River valley of Liaoning province, the Chinese
province bordering on North Korea. One of the bronzes bears an inscription
saying that it was cast for one “Jizi.” Could this be evidence that Jizi founded
a state well to the north of the former Shang state?
One of the reasons for introducing these three ﬁgures, the stories about
whom probably owe more to later moralistic historiography than to actual

Biographies

events, is for what they suggest about Luzi Sheng. Since Jizi is explicitly said
to have been a son of King Wen Ding, that it was Luzi Sheng who was then
appointed to be the titular leader of the Shang people might mean that he
too was at least of the same generation as Jizi, which would be consistent
with the Luzi Sheng gong being dedicated to his father of the Day Ding.
Regardless of who Luzi Sheng’s father may have been, his rule over the Shang
people did not last for long. As the Tai Bao gui recounts, the Zhou suppressed
the rebellion that put him in place, and then Luzi Sheng and most of the
Shang people passed almost entirely from the historical record.
