CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF LI JI AND MU JIANG

Li Ji (d. ) is perhaps the most famous femme fatale of the Springs and
Autumns period, and one of the most famous women of Chinese history.
Her story inevitably involves also the stories of many men. Li Ji was a
daughter of the ruler of the Li Warriors, a non-Chinese people living to the
north of the state of Jin in present-day Shaanxi province. In , Duke Xian
of Jin (r. –) was determined to attack the Li Warriors. Before doing so,
he had a turtle-shell divination performed. The diviner told him that the
auspice indicated that it would be Victorious and yet not auspicious, saying
that the oracle stated: Clasped together with bit and bone: The teeth and
fangs are slippery, The Warriors and Xia (i.e., Chinese) in each others
clutches. The diviner went on to explain that while the attack would be
successful, it would bring great trouble to the state of Jin. Duke Xian did not
listen to this prognostication, and attacked the Li Warriors as he had
intended. Having suered a great defeat, the ruler of the Li Warriors
presented Duke Xian with Li Ji and her younger sister, Shao Ji. Smitten with
Li Jis great beauty, he named her as his principal consort in the place of his
previous consort, who had died after giving birth to at least two children: a
son, Shensheng, who was the heir apparent, and a daughter, who would
become the wife of Duke Mu of Qin (r. –). Duke Xian had two other
sons by secondary consorts, the famous Chonger, who would eventually
become Duke Wen of Jin (r. –) and the younger Yiwu, who would
rule Jin even sooner as Duke Hui (r. –). Li Ji in her own turn gave
birth to two other sons, Xiqi and Zhuozi.
Li Ji wished to have her own son Xiqi named as heir apparent, so she
persuaded Duke Xian to send Prince Shensheng and his two younger half-
brothers, Chonger and Yiwu, to oversee distant posts within the state, a sort
of internal exile. When the duke did so, Li Ji continued to plant suspicions
between the duke and Shensheng in particular. It is said that she caused
Shensheng to return to the capital, bringing with him sacricial beer and

Biographies

meats to be oered to his deceased mother, knowing that these oerings
would be shared with Duke Xian at a banquet. After Shensheng arrived with
his oerings, unbeknownst to either him or Duke Xian, Li Ji poisoned the
foodstus. As they prepared to eat, Li Ji insisted that any food brought into
the palace from outside should be tested. Giving it to a dog, the dog died;
giving it to an attendant, he too died. At this, Li Ji pretended to be distraught,
accusing Shensheng of attempting to murder his father. Urged by his own
advisers to defend himself before Duke Xian, Shensheng committed suicide
instead. Persuaded by Li Ji that this was part of an extended plot against him,
Duke Xian then sent ocers to kill his other sons Chonger and Yiwu, both
of whom escaped and went into exile outside of the state.
In , Duke Xian died. Without an heir apparent having been named,
the state government fell into the hands of Duke Xians two most important
ministers, Li Ke and Xun Xi. Li Ji conspired with Xun Xi to have her elder
son, Xiqi, named the ruler, but Li Ke immediately killed the boy. Li Ji and
Xun Xi next turned to the second son, Zhuozi, but this time Li Ke killed
Zhuozi as well. It would be another fteen years before Jin nally recovered
from this conspiracy. Li Ji never would. Li Ke had her publicly whipped and
then executed. Her saga would prove the accuracy of the oracle: Clasped
together with bit and bone: The teeth and fangs are slippery, The Warriors
and Xia in each others clutches.
Mu Jiang (d. ) lived a century after Li Ji, and comes somewhat after her
too in the annals of the most infamous women of the Springs and Autumns
period. But she certainly ranks near the top of that unhappy list. Mu Jiang
was a daughter of a lord of Qi (whence the surname Jiang), the wife of Duke
Xuan of Lu (r. –), and the mother of Duke Cheng (r. –). Mu
Jiang outlived Duke Xuan by several decades. During much of that time, she
did not act the part of a grieving widow. It is not without reason that in the
later Biographies of Arrayed Women, she is grouped among the Scheming
Lovers.
In Lu at this time, real power in the state was held by the heads of the
three major lineages of the ruling house: Ji Wenzi (–), Shusun Xuanbo
(better known by his name Shusun Qiaoru), and Meng Xianzi (–).
After Duke Xuan died, his widow Mu Jiang began a quite public aair with
Shusun Qiaoru. The two plotted to oust the other lineages and to conscate
their property. This plot nally came to a head in , at a time when the
states of Jin and Chu and their respective allies, were about to engage in the
major battle at Yanling. Lu was allied with Jin, but was delinquent in
contributing troops to the battle because Lord Cheng was occupied


Li Ji and Mu Jiang

defending his position against his mother and Shusun Qiaoru; this earned
the enmity of Jin, which initially moved against Lord Cheng. However, the
plot was exposed and Shusun Qiaoru ed in exile to Qi, and Mu Jiang was
arrested and imprisoned in the palace of the heir apparent. When she was
rst imprisoned, she had a divination performed on her behalf to determine
whether she would be set free.
The account of this divination, told as a ashback after her death in ,
is the most famous account of divination using the Zhou Changes or Classic
of Changes, and Mu Jiangs interpretation of the result is often thought to
portend the transformation of this book from a manual of divination to a
classic of wisdom. The divination was apparently conducted with some
divination text other than the Zhou Changes, resulting in one hexagram that
would almost certainly have been inauspicious. However, the diviner,
employing some sort of trick, suggested that if the Zhou Changes were
used, the result would be the hexagram Following, which he interpreted
as auspicious: that Mu Jiang would certainly be released. Mu Jiang refuted
his reasoning, quoting the text and providing a philosophical interpretation
of it.

Mu Jiang passed away in the Eastern Palace. When she rst went there,
she divined by milfoil about it, meeting the eight of Gen Stilling.
The scribe said: This is called Stilling s Following . Following
means getting out. Milady will certainly quickly get out. Jiang said:
Not so! In the Zhou Changes this says:
Following: Prime, Receipt, Benet, Armed. Without trouble.
Prime is the leader of the body; Receipt is the gathering of enjoyment;
Benet is the harmony of propriety; and Armed is the trunk of
endeavors. Embodying humaneness suces to lead people; enjoying
virtue suces to join the rites; beneting others suces to harmonize
propriety; and arming sturdiness suces to strengthen endeavors.
Thus, there can be no deception even if in this way it is Following.
Without trouble. Now I am a woman and have taken part in disorder.
Solidly in a lowly position, I was also inhumane; this cannot be said to
be Prime. Not bringing peace to the state cannot said to be Receipt.
Acting and harming my person cannot be said to be Benet. And
abandoning my position to indulge in licentiousness cannot be said to
be Armed. With these four virtues, one might Follow and be
without trouble. But since I have none of them, how could I Follow?

Biographies

And since I have taken up evil, how could I be without trouble? I will
surely die here, and will not be able to get out.

She did indeed die there, never having gotten out. However, her interpretation
of this line of the Classic of Changes has allowed her name to live forever
after.