CHAPTER
ESSAY ON THE EARTH

The history of ancient China is inextricably connected to the geography of
the East Asian landmass. The climate and landscape inuenced everything
from agriculture and hunting to city planning and warfare, with great
diversity across the dierent regions of the area. One might think that the
geography of China today is a good indication of what it was like in antiquity;
as the great poet Du Fu (–) wrote upon surveying the destruction of
the Tang-dynasty (–) capital of Changan after a civil war: The nation
is destroyed; the mountains and rivers remain. However, while the
mountains and rivers of antiquity may remain, their appearance and their
inuence over the lifestyles of the people were radically dierent from what
they are today.
One of the earliest accounts of ancient Chinas geography is a chapter of
the Exalted Scriptures entitled Tributes of Yu; it recognizes nine distinct
regions, each with its own distinctive ora and fauna and also dierent
lifestyles, from the leather clothing worn in the north to the salt and sea
products of the eastern seaboard to metal and jade from the Yangzi River
delta. Although this text bears all the traits of legend, its depiction of the
geographical diversity of ancient China is surely accurate. The territory of
China is bordered by various seas in the east; vast steppe land to the north
and northwest, much of the western steppe now desert; and high mountains
in the south and southwest. The mountains to the west, the Himalayas and
the Tibetan Plateau, constitute the worlds highest landmass. Two of Chinas
major river systems originate in these mountains: the Yellow River, known in
ancient China simply as the River (He), which winds through all of north
China; and the Yangzi, originally also known as the River, but with a dierent
word (Jiang) that is probably of Austroasiatic origin, and then later qualied
as the Long River, which runs in a more or less west-to-east line across what
is today central China before emptying into the East China Sea at Shanghai.
Throughout much of ancient Chinese history, the Yangzi River served as an
indistinct border of the cultures that coalesced into Chinese civilization.

Essays

The Classic of Mountains and Seas and other texts recount a myth
explaining why Chinas mountains rise up in the west and why the rivers
ow to the east: this is said to be the result of a war between Zhurong, the
god of re, and Gong Gong, a rebel with a metal head and human torso—
apparently another version of the myth of the battle between the Yellow
Emperor and Chiyou that explains the correlation between the stars and the
seasons. Like Chiyou, Gong Gong too was defeated. In anger, he is said to
have butted his head against Incomplete Mountain, the western pillar
holding up the sky; when this pillar broke, the earth tilted up and the heavens
tilted down in the west, with the result that the rivers owed down to the
lower land and ultimately into the seas in the east.
In fact, at about the time that Gong Gong is supposed to have butted
Incomplete Mountain —between 5000 and 3000 BCE, the seas were at their
highest point following the age of the glaciers, and the shoreline, especially
in north China, was much farther to the west than it is at present. Gradually,
over the course of the millennia, silt carried downriver by the Yellow River
lled in the coastal area. The Yellow River is so named because of the
tremendous quantity of silt that it carries, giving it a muddy yellowish-brown
color. The River originates in the Kunlun Mountains of western China, the
current province of Qinghai, and then carves a channel through the loess
soil of western Chinas Gansu and Ningxia provinces, loess referring to the
easily eroded particulate soil of the area, before turning almost due south,
forming the border between the two major provinces Shanxi, the name of
which means West of the Mountains, and Shaanxi, West of the Pass. Then
encountering the Qinling Mountains at the border between the present
provinces of Shaanxi and Henan, the River makes a great bend to the east,
beginning its ow through the North China Plain from whence it eventually
empties into the eastern sea. The silt has caused the riverbed to rise over
time, such that in its lower reaches it actually ows above the surrounding
plains, diked on both sides to keep it within its channel. The River has often
breached these dikes, not only causing devastating oods but even regularly
carving out new channels, sometimes to the north and sometimes to the
south of the mountainous Shandong peninsula. These oods doubtless led
to the myth of the great ancient ood that was nally tamed by Yu the Great,
pulling down mountains and dredging out channels.
In fact, much of China was much wetter in antiquity than it is today. Until
about the thirteenth century BCE, the climate of north China was
considerably warmer and moister than it became thereafter. Even then, the
climate was dominated by summer monsoons, with moisture drawn in from

The Earth

the seas as the warm air of the central land mass rises and creates a vacuum;
most of the precipitation for the entire year would fall in the summer
months. In the winter, the winds reverse, blowing air—cold and dry, and
laden with dust—from Inner Asia over northern China. As the world has
cooled, areas of Inner Asia have become deserts. On the other hand, the dust
blown over north China has formed its characteristic loess soil, which
produces extremely fertile farm land.
Not only has this loess soil been eroded by the Yellow River and its
numerous tributaries, but the process of erosion has also been exacerbated
by the intensive agriculture practiced there since later Neolithic times.
Already in the Warring States period, writers described the landscape as
being denuded of vegetation, the Mencius describing a mountain in the area
of present-day Shandong as having lost its original beauty.
The trees on Ox Mountain were once beautiful indeed, but because it
is in the outskirts of a great country axes chopped them down. Can
this be considered beautiful? With this, with the breaths of the days
and nights and the precipitation of the rain and dew it is not that no
new shoots grow there, but it is just that the cows and sheep graze
there and that is why it is all bald like this. When people see its baldness,
they assume it never had forests on it, but could it be that this is the
nature of the mountain?
Scholars once believed that this process of deforestation was due to the
climate change that had taken place over the course of the millennium or so
preceding the time of Mencius (c. –). After all, north China was once
home to elephants and rhinoceroses, animals now found only much farther
south. However, just as Mencius assigned responsibility for the deforestation
of Ox Mountain to human activity, so too would it now seem that these
animals were driven from the Yellow River valley not so much by climate
change as by the eects of human settlement on their habitat. In another
passage, Mencius credits the Duke of Zhou, one of the fathers of the Zhou
dynasty, with driving o the wild animals: The Duke of Zhou . . . drove o
the tigers and leopards, rhinoceroses and elephants, and everyone was
greatly delighted. The people may have been delighted, but the environment
paid a heavy price.
It was not just tigers and leopards, rhinoceroses and elephants that were
driven to extinction as Chinese civilization developed in the north China
plain. The area once boasted a remarkable diversity of animals, with aurochs

Essays

and musk-oxen, various species of tigers and bears, and smaller mammals of
all sorts; with rivers and streams teeming with sh and such other aquatic
animals as turtles and toads, and also salamanders; and birds of all sizes and
colors. Unfortunately, throughout most of Chinas heartland, only the birds
survive, their ability to y putting them above the depredations of mankind.
Some indication of the number of these wild animals and their proximity
to human habitation is shown by one Shang-dynasty oracle-bone inscription
about the king going on a hunt; the verication—that is, the record of what
really happened—states:
Crack-making on yiwei (day ): Today the king will hunt at Guang
and make a catch. He really did catch two female tigers, one auroch,
twenty-one deer, two boars, one hundred and twenty-seven Sika deer,
two tigers, two hares, and twenty-seven pheasants.
The catch supplied the court with exotic meat to oer to the ancestors and
for its own consumption. Nevertheless, these wild animals were not hunted
to extinction. Rather, they became endangered as their habitat was changed.
The land was repurposed for agriculture, and cattle and sheep and pigs were
domesticated in great numbers. For instance, just one bone workshop
excavated at Anyang, the Shang capital, contained thirty-four tons of bones;
archaeologists estimate that this represents the remains of , cattle.
Two other such workshops have also been found there. The gradual
disappearance of the many species of deer in turn led to the decline of tigers
and leopards, and all sorts of other animals of prey, including both brown
bears and Asian black bears, who lost their natural source of food. It was
almost certainly not the Duke of Zhou who drove them o to ensure the
safety of the people.
Hunting and the domestication of cattle, sheep and pigs was just a part—
and only a small part, at that—of the way human civilization changed the
environment in China. The rise of agriculture played a much greater role.
Well into the Neolithic period, people survived—and survived well—on
what they could get from hunting and shing, and from foraging for wild
plants, only somewhat supplemented by a single annual crop of millet. By
the second millennium BCE, the time of the Xia and Shang, agriculture
came to provide more and more of the peoples dietary needs. Not only were
the native forests cut down and replaced with fruit trees, but the marshy
grasslands were drained and turned into elds of grain. While these elds
now reliably produced surpluses, allowing for the rise of civilization,

The Earth

paradoxically the people became less healthy: skeletal remains from early
Neolithic villages show that the people then were taller and their teeth freer
of caries than their descendants in the later Neolithic and Bronze Ages,
whose diet came to be dominated by their eating of boiled grains.
The various species of millet were the most important crops, the main
types being broomcorn millet and foxtail millet. Both of these bear seeds
protected by hard hulls that allow them to be stored for several years,
fostering a sedentary lifestyle. These millets came to be supplemented with
other grains, such as wheat and rice, as well as with crops such as soybeans.
Wheat seems to have been introduced to China from the West in either the
third or second millennium BCE, perhaps during the time of the Shang
dynasty; indeed, the word for to come, apparently in the sense of imported,
was originally written with the pictograph for wheat. Nevertheless, because
it was originally adapted to the dry summers and wet winters of the
Mediterranean region, it did not become common in China until the Han
dynasty ( BCE– CE), when farmers nally developed strains that
would ourish in the Chinese climate.
Cattle and sheep arrived in China, also from the west, at about the same
time as wheat; probably they all came on the same wave of contact through
Central Asia. As noted above with respect to the bone workshops excavated
at the Shang capital of Anyang, these domestic animals were soon abundantly
present in the vicinity of human settlements. However, while elites certainly
consumed plentiful amounts of meat of all kinds, it would seem that the
common people did not. Indeed, for all of their contribution to the
development of that elite culture, these and other animals (dogs and pigs
had lived in synergy with humans since the early Neolithic) probably had
adverse eects on most people, for instance facilitating the communication
of disease between species. An Essay on the Earth should properly consider
more than just mountains and rivers to consider the inuences of those
environments on the people who inhabited them; I have tried here to give
some indication of these inuences, with the caveat that they were
exceedingly diverse and changeable over time—even over the course of the
two millennia that are the focus of this book.