CHAPTER 49
BIOGRAPHIES OF CONFUCIUS’S
DISCIPLES

Confucius is renowned as the greatest teacher in all of Chinese history. In
the biography of Confucius in Records of the Historian, it is said that his
disciples numbered three thousand, while there were seventy-two of them
that had mastered all of the six arts: the rites, music, archery, chariotry,
writing and arithmetic. Although these numbers are probably exaggerated,
earlier works already talk of Confucius having had seventy disciples. Of
these disciples, only about twenty-ﬁve are mentioned in the Analects, the
book that purports to record Confucius’s conversations with his disciples,
and of those disciples for whom there is evidence that they interacted with
the Master, ﬁve are probably most important: Yan Yuan, better known as Yan
Hui (521–481); Zhong You, better known as Zi Lu (542–480); Duanmu Ci,
better known as Zi Gong (520–446); Bu Shang, better known as Zi Xia
(b. 507)), and Zeng Shen, better known as Zengzi (505–432). Their stories
are perhaps best recounted based on their appearances in the Analects.
Yan Hui was not Confucius’s oldest disciple, but he was certainly his
favorite. One passage in the Analects says that when Yan Hui died, Confucius
cried so much that his other disciples criticized him for having gone
overboard. To this Confucius responded: “Have I gone overboard? If I did
not go overboard for one such as this man, then for whom?”47 Elsewhere,
Confucius is quoted as saying at the same time: “Ah, heaven has forsaken me,
heaven has forsaken me!”48 In the Analects, Yan Hui is simply portrayed as
having come from a poor family. Confucius is again quoted as saying: “How
worthy is Hui! A single bowl of food and a single ladle of drink, residing in
a shabby lane; others couldn’t bear the sorrow, but Hui’s joy is unchanging.
How worthy is Hui!”49 In fact, Yan Hui’s family background may explain
much more about why he was so beloved by Confucius. In both the Records
of the Historian biography of Confucius and also in the later book Family
Sayings of Confucius, Confucius’s mother is named as Yan Zhengzai,

Biographies

indicating that she was from the Yan family. Among the seventy-two disciples
of Confucius named in traditional sources, fully eight of them are from this
family, suggesting that Yan Hui and these other Yans were cousins of
Confucius. Nevertheless, Confucius’s esteem for Yan Hui could not have
been based on only the family relationship, for his other disciples thought
very highly of him as well.
The Master asked Zi Gong: “Between you and Yan Hui, which is
smarter?” Zi Gong responded: “How would I dare to gaze upon Hui!
When he hears one thing, he understands ten. When I hear one thing,
I understand only two.” The Master said: “You’re not as good as he is.
Neither you nor I is as good as he is.”50
Unlike some of the later disciples, Yan Hui is not quoted often in the Analects,
but one quotation of his provides some indication of his personality and
behavior. When asked by Confucius what his ambition was, Yan Hui
responded simply: “I would wish not to boast of my goodness nor to task
others.”51 In this response, he showed that he had taken to heart one of
Confucius’s most famous teachings about what it means to be humane (ren).
It just happens to come from a chapter of the Analects named “Yan Yuan”:
“Do not impose on others what one does not wish for oneself.”52
Zi Lu was Confucius’s oldest disciple, certainly in terms of age, and
doubtless also in terms of seniority in the time that he spent with Confucius.
In the Analects, he appears beside Confucius more than any other disciple,
and is the disciple most willing to criticize Confucius to his face. Still the two
men more or less of the same age were obviously friends. Confucius admired
Zi Lu’s willingness to act, even at the same time wishing that he would think
more before acting. Zi Lu is portrayed as a man of action rather than of
education or introspection, a bravo who was willing to race into battle even
without the proper preparation. He once asked Confucius: “If you were to set
the Three Armies in motion, who would you take with you,” to which
Confucius responded “I wouldn’t take someone who would wrestle with a
tiger or ford the River and die without regret. If need be, it would be someone
who would look at the situation with trepidation and would plan well what
he could achieve.”53 Similarly, Confucius said to him: “To love ﬁrmness but
not to love learning is the defect of rashness,”54 and on another occasion said
“Someone such as Zi Lu will not die a natural death.”55 In fact, Zi Lu did not
die a natural death; he died ﬁghting for the Lord of Wèi in 480, the year
before Confucius died of old age.


Confucius’s Disciples

According to Records of the Historian, Zi Gong was the most successful of
Confucius’s disciples, distinguishing himself both as a statesman and as a
merchant. When Ji Kangzi, the most powerful man in Confucius’s state of Lu
asked Confucius whether Zi Gong could be entrusted with the government
of the state, Confucius responded “With Zi Gong’s accomplishments, how
would he have any trouble administering the government!”56 As for Zi
Gong’s wealth, Confucius contrasted him with Yan Hui, who as mentioned
above was famous for his ability to endure poverty:
The Master said: “Isn’t Hui really peculiar! He’s frequently broke. Zi
Gong does not accept his fate, and in engaging in commerce he’s
frequently on the mark in his speculations.”57
While Confucius did not hold Zi Gong’s wealth against him, another
anecdote suggests he thought he was overly concerned with saving money.
When Zi Gong encouraged Confucius to eliminate the monthly sacriﬁce of
a lamb to the new moon, Confucius refused to do so, saying “Zi Gong, you
love the sheep, while I love the rite.”58 While one interpretation of this passage
is that Zi Gong was concerned about the expenditure, a more charitable
interpretation might be that he simply wished to spare the lamb. It may have
been in this context that Zi Gong elicited from Confucius one of his most
famous sayings about the single most important lesson in life, already
encountered above in the biography of Yan Hui:
Zi Gong asked: “Is there a single saying that can be practiced to the
end of one’s life?” The Master said: “Would it not be reciprocity! Do
not impose on others what one does not wish for oneself.59
On the other hand, when Zi Gong once said that this was his motto,
Confucius put him down, saying “Zi Gong, it’s not something you’re up to.”60
If Zi Lu was the man of action and Zi Gong the man of accomplishment
among Confucius’s disciples, Zi Xia was the scholar. He is reputed to be the
author of the earliest commentaries on both the Classic of Changes and
Classic of Poetry, and his expertise on the latter of these two classics is on
view in the Analects. When discussing a diﬃcult passage in the text,
Confucius was so moved by Zi Xia’s explanation that he exclaimed “The one
who inspires me is Zi Xia. Now I can begin to discuss the Poetry with him.”61
Many of the sayings attributed to Zi Xia concern the importance of
education. These are collected together in the penultimate chapter of the

Biographies

Analects, suggesting that he may have had some role in the appearance of
this text as well.
Zi Xia said: “A person who knows on a daily basis what he is lacking in,
and on a monthly basis does not forget what he is capable of, can be
said to be fond of learning.”62
Zi Xia said: “To study broadly and to be honest in ambition, to inquire
deeply and to consider what is near at hand, humaneness lies in this.”63
Zi Xia said: “The hundred artisans reside in their shops to complete
their business; gentlepeople study in order to extend their way.”64
Zi Xia said: “Petty people invariably cover over their faults.”65
Zi Xia said: “When one excels at work, then study; when one excels at
study, then work.”66
Another saying of his found at the very beginning of the Analects extends
his view of education to all aspects of life:
Zi Xia said: “Those who honor the worthy in the way that others enjoy
the sexy, who exhaust themselves in serving their parents, who are able
to exert themselves in the service of their lord, and who are sincere in
speaking with their friends: even if you were to say that they are
uneducated, I would certainly call them educated.”67
It would certainly seem that Zi Xia was educated.
The youngest of Confucius’s disciples was Zeng Shen, who is always
referred to in the Analects as Zengzi, the suﬃx “zi” a sign of respect reserved
only for teachers. As in the case of Zi Xia, he too is quoted at both the
beginning and toward the very end of the Analects, suggesting again that he
may have been involved in the editing of the text.
Zengzi said: “I daily reﬂect on myself in three ways: When I think of
others, am I disloyal? When I interact with friends, am I insincere?
Have I passed on anything that I haven’t practiced myself?”68
Zengzi said: “I have heard it from the Master: ‘People never
exert themselves, except perhaps in the case of mourning for their
parents.’

Confucius’s Disciples

Zengzi said: “When superiors lose the way, the people will be dispersed
for a long time. If you could gain their sympathy, then have pity on the
unfortunate and don’t feel too pleased with yourself.”
Zengzi was only twenty-six years old when Confucius died. After this he
lived for another forty-two years, serving in turn as the teacher of Confucius’s
own grandson Zi Si (483–402). The two of them together could be said to be
the architects of the developing Confucian tradition, and are especially
credited with the psychological or inward turn to that tradition. In the case
of Zengzi, this is particularly associated with his insistence on ﬁ lial piety as
the foremost of all human virtues. The Great Learning, which was later
enshrined as one of the Four Books of Confucianism (the others are the
Analects, the Mencius, and the Doctrine of the Mean) and the authorship of
which is credited to Zengzi, spells out an eight-fold path leading in one
direction to self-fulﬁllment and in the other direction to world peace.
Aﬀairs have their roots and branches, situations have their ends and
beginnings. To know what comes ﬁrst and what comes after is to be
near the Dao.
In ancient times, those who wished to make bright virtue brilliant in
the world ﬁrst ordered their states; those who wished to order their
states ﬁrst aligned their households; those who wished to align their
households ﬁrst reﬁned their persons; those who wished to reﬁne
their persons ﬁrst balanced their minds; those who wished to balance
their minds ﬁrst perfected the genuineness of their intentions; those
who wished to perfect the genuineness of their intentions ﬁrst
extended their understanding; extending one’s understanding lies in
aligning aﬀairs.
Only after aﬀairs have been aligned may one’s understanding be fully
extended. Only after one’s understanding is fully extended may one’s
intentions be perfectly genuine. Only after one’s intentions are
perfectly genuine may one’s mind be balanced. Only after one’s mind
is balanced may one’s person be reﬁned. Only after one’s person is
reﬁned may one’s household be aligned. Only after one’s household is
aligned may one’s state be ordered. Only after one’s state is ordered
may the world be set at peace.