CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF YAN

The state of Yan, strategically located at the northern entrance to the great
north China plain, anchored in the foothills of the Taihang Mountains to the
west, the Yanshan Mountains to the north, and the Bay of Bohai of the Yellow
Sea to the east—essentially where modern Beijing is located, was one of the
rst of the eastern colonies founded by the Zhou rulers. Although it survived
more or less quietly throughout much of Zhou history, it did in fact survive,
being one of the last of the states to be vanquished—in —in the course
of the nal Qin campaign to unify the surviving warring states. The name
continues to echo in modern China history, though often written as Yen
instead of Yan. Yenching University (ching, jing in pinyin Romanization,
meaning capital) was one of the rst modern universities founded in
China; its campus, located in the northwestern suburbs of the city, was later
given over to Peking University, which still occupies it, though some of the
old buildings were recently re-appropriated for the newly established
Yenching Academy. The name is often heard as well in the United States, by
way of the Harvard-Yenching Institute, founded in 1928 as a separate
foundation administered by Harvard University. And those who have visited
Beijing will doubtless know of Yanjing Beer, the popular local brew.
The indigenous people of the area had long had cultural contact with the
Shang court at Anyang, but there is no evidence that Shang political control
reached so far north. This situation would change shortly after the Zhou
conquest of Shang, when the Zhou conquerors established Yan as their
northernmost colony. After the untimely death of King Wu of Zhou
(r. 1049/1045–1043), and the dicult succession of his young son King Cheng
of Zhou (r. 1042/1035–1006), Shi, the Duke of Shao, a son of King Wen of
Zhou (r. 1099/1056–1050), albeit by a secondary consort, joined together with
his younger half-brother Dan, the Duke of Zhou to serve as the protectors
of the young king. Like the Duke of Zhou, who was only nominally appointed
to rule the eastern colony of Lu, the Duke of Shao—the Grand Protector—
was appointed to rule Yan, represented there by his eldest son. The Grand

Hereditary Houses

Protector remained in the Zhou capital, where he exercised considerable
power; in fact, he long outlived the Duke of Zhou, and would go on to be the
eminence grise behind the king not only throughout King Chengs reign but
also well into the following reign of King Kang (r. 1005–).
The tradition that the Duke of Shao had been appointed to found the
Zhou colony at Yan was conrmed in 1986 by bronze vessels excavated from
a tomb at the site of Liulihe, just southwest of Beijing. The short inscription
on one of these bronze vessels, known as the Ke he, seems to record the
initial command to the Duke of Shaos son, Ke.

The king said: Grand Protector, it is your intelligence and your sweet-
wine that you have oered to me, your ruler. I greatly respond to your
oering, commanding Ke to be lord at Yan, administering the Qiang,
Ma, Cuo, Y, Y, and Wei. Ke came to Yan, and sent in soil and his
supervisors, herewith making this treasured oertory vessel.

The site at Liulihe included an extensive cemetery and also the remains of a
walled city surrounded by a moat, all dating to the early Western Zhou. Roof
tiles in the Zhou metropolitan style suggest that there were palace structures
inside the walls as well as the colonys own bronze foundry. Three tombs in
the cemetery were furnished with the two ramps indicative of a rulers tomb;
unfortunately, two of them had been looted before the arrival of modern
archaeologists. The other one produced the bronzes the inscriptions of
which recount Kes coming to rule Yan. That inscription recorded that Ke
was to rule over six dierent indigenous peoples, and dierent burial
practices in the cemetery do seem to show that Yan was a multi-ethnic state.
Archaeological evidence at Liulihe is overwhelmingly concentrated in
the early Western Zhou. One of the two looted tombs of rulers of the state
probably belonged to a lord Zhi, known from looted bronze vessels in
various museum collections. The inscription on one of these bronzes, the
Yan Hou Zhi ding, shows that he made the long trip back to the Zhou capital,
Ancestral Zhou (Zongzhou):

Zhi, Lord of Yan, rst presented service at Ancestral Zhou. The king
awarded Zhi twenty double-strands of cowries, whereby he makes for
(his mother) Si this treasured oertory vessel.

Unfortunately, the cemetery at Liulihe seems to have ceased being used after
these rst three generations, and no subsequent early capital site has been


Yan

found. The history of the state in Records of the Historian supplies hardly any
other information. After the time of Grand Protector Shi, it records simply
that nine generations later, at the time that King Li of Zhou (r. /–
/) ed into exile, the lord of Yan was Lord Hui. Thereafter, even
though the names of the rulers are given, the only records are to correlate
their reigns with those of other rulers; almost nothing is known of the
internal history of the state for more than ve hundred years.
In , King Kuai of Yan (r. –, d. ), having grown old and
seeking to emulate the sage-kings of antiquity Yao and Shun, abdicated in
favor of his chief minister Zi Zhi, and deposed his own son, the crown prince
Ping. This was in line with a philosophical and social movement at the time
to exalt the worthy (shang xian), but for the kings of the day—and especially
those of the neighboring states, it posed an existential threat to their own
right to rule—and to transmit their rule to their sons. Some sense of this
threat can be seen in the inscription on the Zhongshan Wang Cuo ding
bronze vessel, which was discovered in 1974 at Pingshan, Hebei. The vessel
was cast for King Cuo of Zhongshan (r. c. –), a small, non-Chinese
state located in that area, which is not far from Yan. Most of the lengthy
inscription deals with the domestic aairs of Zhongshan, but the beginning
refers emphatically to the events that were just then taking place in Yan.

It was the fourteenth year, King Cuo of Zhongshan made a caldron bowl,
the inscription saying: Wuhu, the proverb is not remiss indeed. I have
heard: For a snake, it is better to sink into the depths than to sink among
the people. Previously Yans Ruler Zi Kuai was profoundly conscientious
and broadly informed, long serving as the peoples ruler, defending
against the things under heaven. Nevertheless, he was confused and
dazzled by Zi Zhi and lost his country, becoming reviled by all under
heaven. How much more so would it be the case with me, a young ruler!

In , Ping, the erstwhile crown prince, rebelled against Zi Zhi. King
Xuan of Qi (r. –) took advantage of the civil war in Yan to attack and
annex the state, initially installing a puppet ruler. However, this invasion
brought about yet another rebellion. When the Qi army withdrew, King
Wuling of Zhao (r. — B.C.) moved in to establish a younger son of
King Kuai as King Zhao of Yan (r. –). In the course of the rebellions
and counter-rebellions surrounding this attempted abdication, the noble
lineages of the state were thoroughly stripped of whatever power they still
had. King Zhao was able to take advantage of this political vacuum to impose

Hereditary Houses

land and military reforms and to attract worthy ministers from other states.
By , the state had become suciently wealthy to join together with Qin,
Chu and the three former Jin states to attack Qi, forcing King Min of Qi (r.
–) to ee south, where he was captured and killed by the Chu army.
Yan, being the only local army, entered the Qi capital of Linzi, capturing all
of the treasures of the state.
The last event in which the state of Yan was a major actor came in .
Two years earlier, Qin had begun its nal campaign to defeat all of the
remaining independent states, rst conquering Han and, then, in , Zhao.
That put the Qin army on the doorstep of Dukang, the fertile southern plain
of Yan. The Yan army was under the command of Huan Yi (d. ), who had
formerly served Qin but then had left for Yan when he lost favor in Qin.
Huan Yi realized that the Yan army was no match for the Qin army. He then
launched a plot with Jing Ke (d. ), a nobleman from Wei who had similarly
ed to the north to Yan, whereby Jing Ke would assassinate King Zheng of
Qin, the soon-to-be First Emperor, Qin Shi Huangdi (r. /–). The
plan was for Jing Ke to gain admission to King Zheng by oering him the
head of Huan Yi, who agreed to commit suicide so that the plan might work.
Jing Ke did gain admission, and nearly succeeded in stabbing King Zheng,
but in the end failed; he was killed, and King Zheng then turned his fury on
Yan, conquering it in .

Figure . Han-dynasty wall carving of Jing Kes attempted assassination of King
Zheng of Qin; from Jin shi suo (1821).