CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF BAO SI

The Chinese political theory of the Mandate of Heaven generally manifests
itself in history in terms of a purported dynastic cycle, in which the founding
father of a dynasty is described as perfectly virtuous at a time when the last
king or kings of the preceding dynasty are evil incarnate. This is supposed to
have been true of the evil King Jie of the Xia dynasty, who was overthrown
by the King Cheng Tang (r. sixteenth century) of the Shang dynasty, and
even more so of the paradigmatically evil King Zhu of Shang (i.e., Di Xin;
r. 1086–1045), who was overthrown in his turn by kings Wen (1099/1056–
1050) and Wu (r. 1049/1045–1043) of the Zhou dynasty. An all too common
concomitant feature of these early dynastic changes is that at least some of
the evil behavior of the last kings of dynasties is blamed on women. In the
case of King Jie, it was his consort Mo Xi; in the case of King Zhu, it was Da
Ji.
The Chinese on-line encyclopedia Baidu gives the following description
of King Jie of Xia:

King Jie was culturally and martially complete and with his bare hands
was able to straighten iron hooks, but he was licentious beyond all
bounds and vicious without morals. He was arrogant and lazy, corrupt
in his lifestyle, employing the great power and wealth of the masses to
construct his palaces and jasper gardens, drafting in beautiful women
from every area to ll his rear quarters.

It also provides the following painting to illustrate this depravity.
The colophon reads:

Not attending to court aairs, dallying with Mo Xi,
Turning everywhere to wine, besotted with foolishness.
Coming to when Tang of Shang took up weapons,
He was chased out, awakening too late.

Biographies

Figure . King Jie of Xia with his consort Mo Xi and others; from Wang Yunwu
ed., Gu Lie n zhuan (Shanghai: Shangwu yinshuguan, 1936).

Of all of the women blamed for the falls of dynasties, none is so infamous
as Bao Si, who is blamed in large measure for the fall of the Western Zhou.
According to the Basic Annals of Zhou chapter of Records of the Historian,
in the third year of the reign of King You of Zhou (r. –), the king
became enchanted with Bao Si. When she then gave birth to a son named Bo
Fu (also known as Bo Pan), the king deposed his original queen, the daughter
of the ruler of the more or less important state of Shen, and also her son, the
heir apparent, and made Bao Si his queen and named Bo Fu the heir apparent.
Needless to say, this infuriated the Lord of Shen and also precipitated a crisis
among the related states.
Records of the Historian goes on to relate the following story about
Bao Si.

Of old when the Xia was in decline, there were two divine dragons that
stopped in the court of the Xia king and said to him: We are the two
lords of Bao. The king of Xia divined about whether to kill them, to
drive them o, or to retain them, none of which was auspicious. He
then divined about requesting their saliva and storing it, which was
auspicious. Then he wrapped it in silks and announced it in writing.
When the dragons died, the saliva remained; he put it in the cabinet
and left it there. When Xia came to an end, they transmitted this box


Bao Si

to the Shang, and when Shang came to an end, they again transmitted
it to the Zhou. Through the three dynasties, no one dared to open it.
Late in the reign of King Li (–), the king opened it to look at it.
The saliva owed out into the court, and they couldnt get rid of it.
King Li sent his consorts, naked, to shout at it. The saliva transformed
into a black turtle and entered into the kings rear chamber, where one
of the young concubines who was already mature encountered it and
became pregnant. Giving birth without a father, she was afraid and
cast out the baby.
At the time of King Xuan (r. –), the young girls sang a ditty:
A rejected bow and bamboo quiver, Will really lose the state of Zhou.
With that, King Xuan heard that there was a husband and wife who
had purchased this box. The king sent someone to arrest and execute
them. They were escaping when they saw coming out into the road the
weird baby that had been cast o by the girl from the kings rear
chamber. Hearing its cry in the night, they felt sorry for it and took it
up. The husband and wife then got away, eeing to the state of Bao.
Someone from Bao who was charged with a crime, oered the king the
baby girl that had been cast o by way of paying their ne. That cast-
o baby girl from Bao was Bao Si. In the third year of King You (),
the king saw her in the rear quarters and fell in love with her, and she
gave birth to Bo Fu. The king deposed the Queen from Shen and her
son, and made Bao Si his queen and Bo Fu the heir apparent. The
Grand Secretary Bo Yang said: The misfortune is complete indeed,
there is nothing that can be done about it.

It goes without saying that this story is entirely ctional. However, the story
of Bao Si is repeated in texts of all sorts from ancient China, and so there must
be a kernel of truth to it. The earliest such mention comes in one of the odes of
the Classic of Poetry, from not too much later than the time of King You. One
of the longest poems in the classic, The First Month, recounts the troubles of
the time in such detail and such passion that there can be no doubt that there
was something seriously wrong. Here is just the beginning of the poem and the
stanza that blames Bao Si for destroying the capital and the dynasty.

In the rst month frost is heavy; My heart is worried and wounded.
Lies and rumors of the people, Are brought forward ever more.

Biographies

Thinking about my solitude, My worried heart pounding pounding.
Take pity on my triing heart; Depression is making me sick.
When my parents gave birth to me, Why did they give me such
torment?
It was not there before my time, It will not be there after me.
Beautiful words come from the mouth, Deceitful words come from
the mouth.
My worried heart throbbing throbbing, Because of which I am
accused.
...
Oh, the worries of the heart, Are as if it is tied in knots.
Now as for the governors here, Why are they so vicious like this!
When the ames are rising on high, How could anyone stamp them
out.
Doubly majestic was Zongzhou, Bao Si has extinguished it.

The fall of the Western Zhou was a long time in coming. It was surely not
the fault of Bao Si, nor even that of King You, though he doubtless did little
to mitigate the problems. The problems were institutional, and no single
man—and certainly no single woman—would have been able to change the
course of history.