CHAPTER
ESSAY ON BRONZE

Of all of the arts that the craftsmen of ancient China practiced with very
great skill, such as pottery making, jade carving, silk weaving, and lacquer
designs, the supreme art was doubtless that of the bronze casters. It is not a
coincidence that most of ancient Chinese history occurred during the
period routinely referred to as the Bronze Age. Bronze was employed
throughout the entire period in making the implements of both ritual and
warfare, routinely said to be the great aairs of state, and it is prominently
displayed throughout the museums of the world.
Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. In ancient China, lead was usually
added as well. The casting of bronze vessels began in central China early in
the second millennium BCE, some thousand or more years later than its
rst appearance in West Asia. Although the origin of Chinese bronze casting
is debated in China, with many archaeologists still arguing for indigenous
invention, it is increasingly clear that at least the idea of smelting ores to
produce a liquid that would then harden into a new shape, if not the
technique of casting bronze vessels themselves, came into China from the
west. The earliest items made of cast bronze in what is today China, knives
and jewelry cast in at stone molds or perhaps bivalve molds, are found in
the western provinces of Xinjiang and especially Gansu, appearing as much
as one thousand years before bronze is rst seen in China proper. The rst
bronze vessels to appear in the Central Plains of China were found at the
Erlitou site, very near the city of Luoyang in northern Henan province.
Although there is also a debate about the identication of this Erlitou
Culture, archaeologists and historians in China routinely regard it as the
capital of the Xia dynasty, and this is certainly consistent with its location
and date, around 1700–1600. These earliest vessels, which appear somewhat
crude by later standards, would quickly develop into some of the most
beautiful bronze pieces seen anywhere in the world.
While knives and jewelry could be cast in at stone molds or simple
bivalve molds, the casting of even the simplest vessel required a much more

Essays

Figure . Early Western Zhou bronze zun-vase; Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York; ...

elaborate technology. In the West, from the earliest times, bronze-casting
made use of the lost-wax method of casting, which began with a model of
the desired vessel or implement made in clay and coated with wax, around
which still more clay was packed with an opening at the bottom. This whole
assemblage was then heated, causing the wax to melt and ow out of opening
at the bottom of the assemblage, while the clay baked into a hard outer shell,
which would then serve as a mold. Molten bronze was then poured into the
opening, lling the void inside the mold left by the melted wax. Once the
assemblage cooled, and the molten bronze had hardened, the clay mold was
then broken apart, leaving just the desired vessel or implement in bronze. By
contrast, from the very earliest times in China the casting of bronze vessels
was achieved with a technique referred to as piece-mold casting. This began
with making a model of the desired bronze vessel in semi-hard clay; if any
dcor was desired on the exterior of the vessel, this might be added to the
model at this time. Next, a mold, also made of clay in several pieces, was tted
around this model. This mold, which could be taken apart and then tted


Bronze

Figure . Early Western Zhou-dynasty you-wine warmer; c. 1050 BCE;
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; ..3a, b.

back together again, would accept the shape of the model, as well as any
ornamentation that had been applied to it; other ornamentation could be
applied directly to the interior of the mold, when it was opened. The model
would then be removed from the mold assemblage, placed on a base, and its
outer layer would then be shaved o, to the desired thickness of the intended
bronze vessel. This sounds like a very cumbersome procedure; in fact, it was
probably not much more dicult than using a vegetable peeler to peel the
outer layer of a potato or a carrot. Once this layer of clay had been removed
from the original model, the remaining clay would then become the core of
the casting assemblage. The mold was then placed again around the model,
which was now the core of the assemblage, with an opening or openings into
which molten bronze could be poured and out of which the gasses produced
by the bronze could escape. The molten bronze would ll the space between

Essays

a b

c d e

f g
Figure . Models showing the process of piece-mold casting for a bronze zhi-
beaker; courtesy of Lian Haiping, Shanghai Museum.


Bronze

the core and the mold. When it cooled, the mold could then be opened, inside
of which would be the bronze vessel, together with the dcor that was on the
mold. Strangely enough, although it seems logical that these mold assemblages
could be reused to make multiple vessels, they seem never to have been re-
used; instead, they were broken apart and discarded. The various steps in the
process are shown in the Figure ..
Cumbersome though this process would seem to be, it took advantage of a
long tradition of pottery making in China, and provided the ancient bronze-
casters with at least one great advantage over the lost-wax casting method: they
had access to the inside of the mold assemblage, and so could add extremely
elaborate and detailed ornamentation to the vessel, as seen in bronze vessels
from the early Western Zhou dynasty, about 1000 (Figures .., .). One
constraint that the piece-mold technology imposed upon the bronze casters: to
be able to take the mold pieces apart and t them back together again, they
needed to be symmetrical about the core. This produced an aesthetic in China
that valued symmetry, both in the shape of vessels, and also in their dcor.
Bronze vessels were used in sacrices to the ancestors, whether to warm
wine or to cook meat or grain. They also came to carry inscriptions, rst very
simple inscriptions with just a clan sign or the name of the ancestor to whom
sacrices would be oered. However, over time, the inscriptions would grow
longer and longer. While in later times, inscriptions would sometimes be
carved into the cold metal with a knife, ordinarily—and certainly from the
earliest times—the inscriptions were cast directly into the vessel, usually on
the inside, though in the case of some types of vessels or musical instruments,
the inscription might appear on the outside. The insertion of these inscriptions
entailed yet another step in the complicated procedure of casting a vessel. The
text to be inscribed would be incised into clay. This would then be impressed
with another slab of clay, producing a relief version of the text originally
inscribed into the clay. Then a space would be excavated in the model (i.e., the
original core) of the casting assemblage, and this slab of clay carrying the
inscription would be inserted into that space. When the vessel was then cast,
the inscription would appear on the inside of the vessel, the text being reversed
yet again, such that it would appear intaglio (i.e., as if incised) in the vessel.
This same technique could be used to produce inscriptions of any length.
By the late Shang dynasty, inscriptions of twenty or thirty characters began
to be produced. These usually commemorated an award by the Shang
king to the patron for whom the vessel was cast; the vessel was usually
dedicated to an ancestor. Throughout the Western Zhou dynasties,
inscriptions grew longer and longer, by the end of the period reaching

Essays

Figure . Inscription on Mao Gong ding; from Luo Zhenyu (1866–1940), Sandai
jijin wencun (Repository of writings on auspicious bronzes of the Three Dynasties)
(Shanghai: 1936), .–.

almost characters in the Mao Gong ding, a vessel cast about , and
commemorating a royal award to the patron: Yin, the Duke of Mao.
Two or three centuries after the time of the Mao Gong ding, during the
Springs and Autumns period, bronze-casters of China nally began to
experiment with lost-wax casting, though even then and thereafter they
would use the technique only occasionally, usually preferring to use the
time-honored technique of piece-mold casting. The rst pieces made with
lost-wax casting still show the casters preference for symmetry. However,
it was only a matter of a short time before bronze casters took full advantages
to create fantastic creature in every imaginable shape. This would bring to
full ower the art of bronze-casting in ancient China.