CHAPTER
ESSAY ON WRITING

The preface to Discussing Pictographs and Analyzing Compound Graphs,
Chinas earliest dictionary, describes the invention of writing in the following
manner:
In antiquity when Baoxi, Tamer of Beasts, ruled all under heaven, he
looked up and observed the images in the heavens, looked down and
observed the patterns on the earth, examined the markings of birds
and animals and the properties of the earth, and near at hand taking
from his own body and at a distance taking from the many things
thereupon rst made the eight trigrams of the Changes in order to
suspend patterns and images. Coming to Shennong, the God of
Agriculture, he knotted cords by way of governing and systematized
the aairs. As the many occupations proliferated, ornament and
artice sprouted. Cangjie, the scribal ocer of the Yellow Emperor,
saw the tracks and footprints of birds and beasts and knowing that
their dierent patterns could be dierentiated, for the rst time
invented writing.
This suggests that Chinese writing was originally pictographic, based on the
tracks and footprints of birds and beasts, or rather on the shapes of the birds
and beasts themselves. The earliest writing in China, the oracle-bone
inscriptions of the Shang dynasty, contains hundreds of examples of
pictographs. Figure . shows just a few obvious examples drawn from the
animal kingdom.
Whereas pictographs can only depict tangible objects, we speak about much
more than this: actions, ideas, directions, names, and so forth, that are not so
directly represented. Thus, the Discussing Pictographs and Analyzing Compound
Graphs dictionary distinguished ve other types of characters in addition to
pictographs: pointing at things characters, combining ideas characters,

Essays

Figure . Pictographs of animals seen in Shang oracle-bone inscriptions.
shape-sound characters, loan characters, and explaining each other
characters. The rst two of these are essentially also pictographic in nature,
though their depictions depend on the combination of two or more elements;
all of these might best be categorized as characters that express meaning.
The category combining ideas characters is often called ideographs.
While this term is sometimes used—quite incorrectly—to describe all
Chinese characters, the oracle-bone inscriptions show that it too was a
powerful tool in the toolkit of the inventers of the Chinese script, with
additional hundreds of such characters known. The following are just a few
examples. The iconicity of the characters may not always be immediately
apparent to readers unfamiliar with early Chinese writing; however, in all
cases the components are quite conventional and would be well recognized
by all readers of the script.

to reach (the modern character ji ), the character combining a
man and a hand reaching him from behind
to capture (the modern character fu ), the character
combining a child with a hand grabbing it from above
to give birth (the modern character yu , the fuller form of yu
), the character combining a mother and an upside-down
child together with added dots indicating amniotic uid
sickness (the modern character ji ), the character combining a
bed and a man, often with added dots apparently indicating
sweat from a fever
to open (the modern character pi ), the character combining a
door with two hands pushing out
to ascend (the modern character zhi ), the character
combining two feet going up a mound

Writing

to descend (the modern character jiang ), the character
combining two inverted feet going down a mound
to plant (the modern character yi ), the character combining a
man with two hands extended grasping a tree over earth
evening (the modern character mu or mu ), the character
combining a sun with four trees or grass
morning (the modern character zhao ), the character
combining a sun, moon, and grass, indicating the time when
both the sun and moon are visible in the distance
to see (the modern character jian ), the character combining
an eye with a person
to gaze (the modern character wang ), the character
combining an eye directed upward from a person
to attend to (eating); right away (the modern character ji ),
the character combining a food bowl with a kneeling gure
before it
to nish (the modern character ji ), the character combining a
food bowl with a kneeling gure whose mouth is turned away
from the food bowl
to feast (the modern character xiang ), the character
combining a food bowl with two kneeling gures facing the
food bowl
to crow (the modern character ming 匤), the character
combining a mouth and a bird
to bark (the modern character fei ), the character combining a
mouth and a dog
to smell; to stink (the modern character chou), the character
combining a nose and a dog
The number of such combining ideas characters could be multiplied many
times over. At the earliest stage of the language, the oracle-bone inscriptions
of the Shang dynasty, their iconic meaning is usually unmistakable, as in the
case of the horse or deer, though this iconicity tends to get lost at later
stages of writing. Other cases, such as ming 匤 to crow and fei to bark,
which combine a mouth () component with the pictograph of a bird
(匕) or dog (), rely on the combination of ideas more than pictography.

Essays

The third type of characters that express meaning is called pointing at
things characters. It was once thought that there were very few examples of
this category, typical examples being the graphs
and
dierentiated by
a single stroke above or below a line indicating the horizon to mean above
or below, now written as and ; or and for the crown of a tree
and roots of a tree respectively with a line indicating the part of the tree
(tree being written in modern Chinese characters as ). Now it is known
that many other characters were formed more or less in the same way, as the
following examples taken from the human body show:
forearm (the precursor to the modern character hong ), a circle
on the arm beneath the hand (i.e., you ) marking this part of the
arm
elbow (the precursor to the modern character zhou ), a
noticeable bending at the end of the forearm (i.e., you ), with an
additional mark indicating the point of focus
to kneel (the precursor to the modern character gui ), a mark
beneath the knee of a kneeling gure (jie or 埢)
armpit the precursor to the modern character ye ), the dots
indicated under the arms of a gure standing frontally (i.e., da )
The several examples here in which the pointing at things character is
indicated as the precursor of a modern character means that a character was
rst written in one form and subsequently came to be written in a dierent
form (often referred to in Chinese as ancient-and-modern characters)
provide good examples of another important category of characters: loan
characters. These are characters where the sound of a word that can be
drawn with a pictograph is borrowed to write a homophonous word that
would be dicult to depict. This is the rebus principle, known not only from
modern television game shows (as in Reader,
), but also in all
other ancient writing systems. These loan characters were already routinely
employed in the Shang oracle-bone inscriptions, as for instance in using the
pictograph of the nose
(i.e., zi ) to indicate the homophonous
preposition from, or the pictograph of a basket
(now pronounced ji
and written ) to write the pronoun he, she, it which was homophonous
at that time (it is now pronounced qi and written ).
Th e number of these
loans is somewhat masked in the later language because in many cases, as in
the case of ji basket and qi
he, she it, or in the case of
for armpits,
which is now written as ye (adding a component to it indicating that it

Writing

has to do with meat or esh), while the original character is used only for
the word also (yi ), the borrowed meaning has entirely supplanted the
original meaning attached to the pictograph, and a new character has been
invented to write the original meaning.
These loan characters or rebus writing allowed an extraordinary
breakthrough in Chinese writing. Imagine the diculty in inventing a
pictographic or conceptual character for it, which surely must count as one
of the most basic words in any language. However, once it was realized that
sound could be utilized in writing, this opened the door for the next great
development: characters that would combine meaning and sound to write
words that might otherwise be dicult, or even impossible, to distinguish.
For instance, it is a simple matter to depict a sh as , or a tree as . However,
whereas it might also be possible to dierentiate pictographically between a
palm tree and a pine tree, how easy would it be to do so between a beech and
a walnut tree? Similarly, we can certainly visualize the dierence between a
shark and a swordsh, for instance, but a trout and a bass look quite a bit
alike. Simply borrowing the sound for trout (in Chinese zun) from the
pictograph
meaning wine vessel; esteemed (originally a pictograph of
two hands holding up a wine vessel, now written zun ) would have been
one option, however it might not have always been easy to disambiguate the
word for trout from that for wine vessel, or even for a type of pheasant,
also pronounced zun. To dierentiate these dierent words, the inventers of
the Chinese script quickly modied the rebus principle, combining the
component carrying the sound with another component that contributed
the basic semantic category. Thus, for trout, a sh 冊 component was
added to the component representing the sound zun, giving the composite
character 劂. Similarly, a bird 匕 component was combined with the same
phonographic component to write the word for pheasant: 吧. This is what
traditional Chinese paleographers term shape-sound characters. It would
prove to be the decisive development in the development of the Chinese
script. Once it began to be exploited fully, it became possible to write any
word in the Chinese language. By the Zhou dynasty, just a few centuries after
the Shang dynasty, most new words were created according to this principle,
and more than % of the characters in modern dictionaries are shapesound characters. Indeed, the category is so pervasive that it would be
almost superuous to provide examples of it.