CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF YIN JIFU

Yin Jifu, also known as Xi Jia or Xibo Jifu, would seem to have been one of
the most well-rounded individuals of the late Western Zhou period, a man
of military, administrative and literary accomplishments. Nevertheless,
although he is mentioned in a few literary sources, his name is today known
only to specialists in the history of the period.
Yin Jifu is mentioned in the Bamboo Annals under the fth year of King
Xuans reign (r. –), as leading an attack against the Xianyun, the
western peoples who fty years later would be the primary force to overthrow
the last of the Western Zhou kings, King You (r. –). There is evidence
that Yin Jifus attack was successful in repelling the Xianyun threat to the
Zhou capital region, since he commemorated his victory by casting a
bronze vessel (using his alternate names Xi Jia and Xibo Jifu). In recognition
of this victory, the king not only awarded him four horses and a chariot,
but also put him in charge of the nances for the entire eastern portion
of the Zhou domain, stretching from the eastern capital at present-day
Luoyang all the way to the lands held by the Southern Huai Peoples—
probably including parts of the present provinces of Henan, Hubei,
Shandong, and Anhui.

It was the fth year, third month, after the dying brightness, gengyin
(day ); the king for the rst time went to attack the Xianyun at Tuhu.
Xi Jia followed the king, cutting o heads and manacling prisoners,
being victorious without defect. The king awarded Xi Jia four horses
and a colt chariot. The king commanded Jia to govern and supervise
the taxes of the four regions of Chengzhou as far as the Southern Huai
Peoples.
The Huai Peoples of old were our tribute money men; they ought
not dare not to produce their tribute, their taxes, their presented men,
and their wares. They ought not dare not to approach the encampments
and approach the markets. If they dare not to follow the commands,

Biographies

then enact punishments and strike and attack them. If it be our
many lords and hundred families who dare not bring them to market
or dare to send in barbarian and illicit wares, they too are to be
punished.
Xibo Jifu makes this basin; may he have long life for ten thousand
years without limit, and sons sons and grandsons grandsons eternally
to treasure and use it.

There is also a poem in the Classic of Poetry entitled In the Sixth Month
that seems to concern this same campaign against the Xianyun, describing
Yin Jifu as both cultured and martial. Called In the Sixth Month, it is an
excellent example of the sort of narrative poetry that developed at just about
the time that Yin Jifu lived.

In the sixth month, bustling about, The war carts had been made ready.
The four stallions raring to go, Loaded with the standard duties.
The Xianyun were greatly ablaze, Because of this we were harried.
The king went out on campaign To set right the royal domain.
Side by side the four black stallions, Their training was by the standard.
It was in that the sixth month, That we completed our duties.
Our duties being complete, We were on the march for thirty miles.
The king went out on campaign, To assist the Son of Heaven.
The four steeds were tall and sturdy, Their great size so majestic.
Broadly did we attack the Xianyun, Oering up our best eort.
Both earnest and in good order, We upheld the duties of war.
We upheld the duties of war, To settle the royal domain.
The Xianyun were by no means weak, Having occupied all of Jiaohuo.
Invading Hao, they reached the verge, As far as the north of the Jing.
With woven patterns of bird emblems, The white banners were all
agleam.
The ten largest war chariots, Went ahead to open the road.
The war chariots riding smooth, Low in the front, high in the back.
The four steeds had gone straight ahead, Gone straight ahead upon
command.
Broadly did we attack the Xianyun, As far as the great plain.
Jifu, both cultured and martial, Is a model for all the countries.
Jifu feasts and is so happy, Having received many blessings.


Yin Jifu

He comes in return from Hao, Our march has been a long, long time.
Giving drinks to the many friends, Along with roast turtle and minced
carp.
And who is it that is with him. Zhang Zhong, the lial and friendly.

The Preface to the Poetry, a Han-dynasty text that describes the contexts
in which the poems of the Classic of Poetry were created, credits the
authorship of four other poems to Yin Jifu; if these credits are to be believed,
this would make Yin Jifu the most prolic poet of his time. In two cases,
these attributions are based on statements in the poems themselves, in which
Yin Jifu takes credit for making the poem. The poem Throngs of People is
one of these. It concerns one Zhong Shanfu, who two years after Yin Jifu had
cast his bronze vessel, was commanded by King Xuan to take an army to
defend the eastern state of Qi.

Heaven gave birth to throngs of people, With their emblems, with
their standards.
The people hold fast to the norms, And ne virtue is what they love.
Heaven reects upon the Zhou, Its radiance reaching down below,
Protecting this Son of Heaven, And giving birth to Zhong Shanfu.
The virtue of Zhong Shanfu, Mild and giving is his standard.
Of commanding manner and visage, Careful in every detail.
The old lessons are his pattern, Awesome manner is his power.
The Son of Heaven approves of him, The bright commands he spreads
about.
The king commanded Zhong Shanfu: Be a pattern to the hundred
aides,
Continue your ancestors work Of protecting the kings person.
Take out and in the kings commands, Serving as the kings throat and
tongue,
Spreading the governance abroad, Energizing the four quarters.
So solemn are the kings commands, It is Zhong Shanfu who presents
them.
Whether the states approve or not, It is Zhong Shanfu who brightens
them.
Being both bright and also wise, Thereby he protects his person.
Morning to night never slacking, In his service of the One Man.

Biographies

People also have a saying: If it is soft then chew it up,
If it is hard then spit it out. It is only Zhong Shanfu
Who neither chews up the soft, Nor spits out the hard.
Neither rude to orphans and widows, Nor in awe of the strong and
mighty.
People also have a saying: Virtue is as light as a feather,
But few are those who can lift it. When I properly think about this,
There is just Zhong Shanfu to lift it, Even without anyones help.
When the fabric of state has holes, There is just Zhong Shanfu to mend
it.
Zhong Shanfu sets out on the road, The four stallions are so robust,
The marching men are so rapid, Each one worried he wont keep up;
The four stallions pounding, pounding, The eight bit-bells clanging,
clanging.
The king commanded Zhong Shanfu To wall o that eastern country.
The four stallions with heads raised high, The eight bit-bells jingling-
jangling.
Zhong Shanfus on the way to Qi; Would that he be soon to return.
Jifu is he who made this chant, Stately as the purest breeze.
May Zhong Shanfu always cherish it, Thereby bringing joy to his
heart.

It is often said that poetry serves as a mirror reecting our truest values.
It is doubtless the case that in this poem Yin Jifu portrayed his colleague as
he himself wished to be portrayed. The poem also reects much about the
late Western Zhou view of the world.