CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF YI YIN AND FU YUE

Ji Zhi, better known to history as Yi Yin, is reputed to have been a close
advisor of Cheng Tang, the founder of the Shang dynasty. As such, he would
have lived in the rst half of the sixteenth century. He is said to have been
born in present-day Ji County, Henan, a member of the Youshen state,
though there are also traditions that he was born either in Shandong
province or in Luoyang. The Yin of his name refers to the ocial position
that he is supposed to have had after the establishment of the Shang dynasty,
it means governor, more or less equivalent to the later position of prime
minister, which one tradition says that he held for more than fty years,
through the rst ve reigns of the dynasty. It is recorded in the Bamboo
Annals that he died at the age of in the eighth year of the reign of King
Wo Ding (c. 1525), though, as we will see, this is part of a dierent tradition
concerning Yi Yin. Oracle-bone inscriptions from later in the dynasty
indicate that he was worshipped together with Cheng Tang.
Legend has it that a woman was picking mulberries beside the Yi River
(in present-day Henan) when she found a baby in a hollow mulberry tree.
The mother had become pregnant when she dreamt that a god told her to
leave home to avoid a ood; looking back upon her ooded town as she was
leaving, she herself was turned into a hollow mulberry tree, from which the
baby was later retrieved. Presented to the king of Youshen, he was raised in
the kitchens, and therefore has entered into Chinese legend as the patron
saint of cooking. Although his cooking skills are praised in many ancient
texts, there are no specic recipes; he is said to have regarded water as the
rst and most important ingredient in cooking, and that the entire process
of turning ingredients into food is a form of transformation that takes place
in the caldron. He is supposed to have intuited his government doctrines
from this skill at harmonizing avors.
Growing up, Yi Yin is also said to have been a brilliant student of history,
such that Cheng Tang, prior to attacking the Xia king Jie, three times went to

Biographies

Youshen to seek instruction from him. Yi Yin was then in a sexual relationship
with Meixi, the deposed rst wife of Jie; from this relationship he had inside
knowledge of the Xia state, which he then used to help Cheng Tang defeat
Xia. Although little is known about any specic military advice he provided,
he is credited with knowing about—spying—on the Xia dynasty before the
battle, and for trickery. This has led to his being regarded in Chinese legend
as the patron saint of military intelligence services.
Other traditions credit Yi Yin with divine healing powers, probably
deriving from his knowledge of the macrobiotic properties of dierent
foods. According to the Mencius, he lived at a time before the connection
between heaven and earth had been severed, and so he was able to speak for
heaven. In this role, he was regarded as the rst of the magicians (wu, often
translated as shamans) of the Shang dynasty, gures who had magical
abilities to know the future and to cure disease. For this, he has also been
regarded throughout Chinese tradition as the patron saint of medicine, and
especially of acupuncture.
Needless to say, all of this is the stu of legend. His biography, such as it
can be pieced together from much later texts, is distinctly contested.
According to the orthodox historical tradition, as exemplied by Records of
the Historian, after the death of Cheng Tang, Yi Yin continued serving as
governor for the next two kings, Wai Bing and Zhong Ren. When Zhong Ren
was succeeded by Cheng Tangs grandson Tai Jia, Tai Jia refused to follow the
ways of Cheng Tang. To teach him a lesson, Yi Yin sent him to live beside
Cheng Tangs grave, while he himself ruled the country in his place. During
this time, Tai Jia is supposed to have studied the precepts of government that
Yi Yin passed on to him. Three years later, Tai Jia acknowledged his faults,
and Yi Yin then relinquished government to him, though still remaining as
his loyal advisor. During this time, Yi Yin is credited with being the author of
several chapters in the Exalted Scriptures. For his part, Tai Jia reformed his
ways such that all of the people paid their allegiance to him and he established
a great peace.
There is an alternate tradition regarding Yi Yins relationship with Tai Jia.
This is seen in the Bamboo Annals. According to this text, after Yi Yin sent Tai
Jia into exile he proclaimed himself Son of Heaven. When Tai Jia subsequently
returned from exile he killed Yi Yin and reclaimed the kingship for himself.
Neither of these two competing narratives about the role Yi Yin played in
the government of the early Shang, if any, can be substantiated by
contemporary evidence. Both of them would seem to be deeply informed by
debates that engaged political theorists of the Warring States period. For


Yi Yin and Fu Yue

instance, Confucius stressed the important role that ministers should play in
government, and Mozi even argued for a sort of meritocracy which, taken to
its extreme, would eclipse the hereditary rights of the nobility. However,
when, as a demonstration of his own humility, Zi Kuai, king the northern
state of Yan, was persuaded in to abdicate in favor his chief minister Zi
Zhi, this practical experiment in meritocracy ended very badly. Within two
years, neighboring states, fearing that this precedent would threaten their
hereditary rights, attacked Yan, killing both Zi Kuai and Zi Zhi. This episode
is famously recounted in the work of the contemporary Confucian
philosopher Mencius, who was just then serving as an adviser to King Xuan
of Qi; Mencius vigorously encouraged King Xuan to attack Yan and restore
its monarchical rights. The orthodox tradition concerning Yi Yin as the loyal
minister voluntarily returning power to Tai Jia after he had reformed his
ways almost certainly reects Menciuss philosophy. On the other hand, the
account in the Bamboo Annals doubtless reects the viewpoint of Zi Kuai
and Zi Zhi.
In the Record of Arts and Letters of the Han History, Yi Yin is credited
as the author of the military text Yi Yin, and a collection of tales called
Persuasions of Yi Yin. He is thought to be the author of the medical texts
Classic Recipes of Soup Fluids, and Materia Medica of Soup Fluids, the word
for soup being, perhaps not coincidentally, the same as the name of the
founder of the Shang dynasty. He is also the subject of numerous unearthed
manuscripts, including those found at the Han-dynasty tomb Mawangdui as
well as among the Tsinghua University manuscripts.
Fu Yue was a legendary adviser to the Shang king Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–
1189), the putative recipient of one of the command chapters of the Exalted
Scriptures: the Command to Yue. According to the story, at the time that
Wu Ding came to power, the Shang was in a period of prolonged decline.
Hoping to restore the fortunes of the state, Wu Ding dreamt that he was
visited by a holy man who would help him rule the country. When he awoke,
he examined his various advisers at court, but none of them resembled the
gure in his dream. He had a portrait drawn of the image, and sent people
throughout the land to search for a match. At the time, Fu Yue was toiling as
a wall-builder at a place called Fu Cli (said to be along the Yellow River in
the southwest of present-day Shanxi province), in the land of a ruler called
Shi Zhong. He is said to have had an unusual physique, with shoulders raised
up looking like the wings of a bird; this made him easily recognizable. When
he was brought to King Wu Ding, the king conrmed that he was the gure
he had seen in his dream. Fu Yue also recounted a similar dream, matching

Biographies

that of the king. With that, the king appointed him as his premier, and also
put him in command of the Shang army. As premier, he advised Wu Ding to
exercise restraint in sacrices to his ancestors. As the leader of the army, he
was commanded to attack the state of Shi in which he had been found, which
he did successfully. Wu Ding went on to enjoy a lengthy reign, and is said to
have restored Shang to its former glory, including especially bringing the
area of modern southern Shanxi province under Shang control.
Fu Yue is not mentioned at all in the tens of thousands of oracle-bone
inscriptions known from the time of King Wu Ding. However, there is a
gure from the time named Ya Que, who led Shang armies into the area of
the Yellow River near where the state of Shi and Fu Cli are supposed to
have been located. Indeed, some scholars even claim that there are
inscriptions recording that Ya Que attacked a state called Shi. Because of this,
it has been suggested that Ya Que is none other than Fu Yue, thus providing
a historical basis to the legend.
Tenuous though this attribution is, Fu Yues importance for Chinese
history has little or nothing to do with whether he actually lived. In the
Warring States period, when the theory of sagely ministers advising rulers
reached a high tide, Fu Yue was one of the most commonly cited examples,
being mentioned in almost all of the philosophical and historical texts of the
period. What is more, as mentioned above, a chapter of the Exalted Scriptures
was devoted to him, and this chapter—said to have been in three parts—was
also quoted by several texts of the period. Unfortunately, the Exalted
Scriptures was lost at the end of the Warring States, often said to have been
burned in the Qin burning of the books. The text of the Exalted Scriptures
that was reconstituted a generation or two after the fall of Qin, the so-called
New Text version, did not include this Command to Yue, even though the
title was included in the known contents of the text. Not only that, an ancient
manuscript version said to have been discovered another couple of
generations later in the Han dynasty, the so-called Old Text version, also did
not contain the chapter. Nonetheless, in the early fourth century CE, a
complete text of the Exalted Scriptures was presented at court, and it did
indeed include a Command to Yue, also in three parts. This contained
passages concerning Fu Yue found in the various Warring States texts that
quoted the Command to Yue, and so seemed to be authentic.
This text of the Exalted Scriptures was accepted as authoritative and went
more or less unquestioned for some fteen hundred years. In the eighteenth
century, scholars demonstrated reasons why much of this text—very much
including the The Command to Yue chapter—was questionable, and for


Yi Yin and Fu Yue

the last two centuries or more the authenticity of the Exalted Scriptures has
been the most important topic in Chinese textual history. The debate over
the authenticity of the received text of the The Command to Yue was nally
resolved in 2010, with the rst publication of a corpus of manuscripts from
the Warring States period that are now in the collection of Tsinghua
University in Beijing. One of the texts in this corpus is in three parts; it is
called The Command to Fu Yue, and is almost certainly the earliest version
of this text now extant. While the description of Fu Yue is more or less the
same as in the received The Command to Yue, the rest of the text is
completely dierent. This almost certainly shows that at least this one
chapter of the Exalted Scriptures is a late forgery, and suggests as well that the
other fteen chapters that were added to the text in the fourth century CE
are also forgeries of that period. To understand the signicance of this debate
within the Chinese classical tradition, imagine that the book of Genesis in
the Hebrew Bible was shown to be a fourth-century CE forgery. Thus, Fu Yue
has again become a gure of great importance in China.