CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF HAN

The hereditary house of Han was one of the three states that were recognized
when the once great state of Jin was divided in . Not only did the creation
of the state of Han derive from civil war in Jin, but the very establishment of
the house, almost three hundred and fty years earlier, also resulted from yet
another civil war in the state. When Lord Wen of Jin (r. –), the titular
founder of the state, died, he was succeeded by his son, Lord Zhao (r. –
), who ruled at the Jin capital Yi. At the same time, Lord Wens younger
brother, Cheng Shi, was given the city of Quwo, which he ruled as a separate
entity, posthumously known as Huan Shu (r. –). When Lord Zhao
was assassinated in , Cheng Shi attempted to enter the capital to take
control of the entire state, but the people of the capital area revolted against
him, and he was forced to withdraw again to Quwo. The two factions—the
main-line lords (hou) of the state and the Quwo branch of the family—
repeatedly attacked each other over the next several decades. In , Cheng
Shis son Zhuang Bo (r. –) succeeded to power in Quwo; six years
later he himself stabbed Lord Xiao (r. –) to death, and again attempted
to take control of the capital. However, he too was rebued by the people of
the capital. This stalemate began to shift when Zhuang Bos son Duke Wu
(r. –/) succeeded to power in Quwo. In , Duke Wu led yet
another attack on the capital at Yi. In this attack, the driver was his own
uncle, the younger brother of Zhuang Bo; his name was Han Wan. This
attack was successful, at least temporarily, causing the lord in the capital,
Lord Ai (r. –) to attempt to ee. However, Lord Ai was captured, and
Duke Wu had Han Wan execute him. For his services, Han Wan was given
the territory of Han, the southern part of the state.
Nothing more is known of the state of Han until , when Jin was riven
with yet further civil unrest. For most of the last two decades of the seventh
century, the Jin government was under the control of Zhao Dun (d. ), the
head of the Zhao family. When he died, control fell to two other great

Hereditary Houses

ministers, Han Jue and Tuan Jia, the rst a supporter of the Zhao family,
while the latter was an ardent opponent of the Zhaos. Tuan Jia eventually
gained the upper hand, and executed all of Zhao Duns family members.
However, he did not kill the wife of Zhao Duns son, who was pregnant at the
time. She eventually gave birth to a son. With the protection of Han Jue, this
son survived to adolescence. Fifteen years later, as the boy was coming to
adulthood, Han Jue brought him back to the capital and together they
exterminated Tuan Jias family. From this time on, the houses of Han and
Zhao would be intimately related, and would often be allied against one or
more of the other six powerful families in Jin: Zhao, Han, Wei, Fan,
Zhonghang, and Xun.
The next mention of Han in the history of Jin does not occur for still
another century. By the beginning of the fth century, the Zhao family had
again gained ascendancy in the state, the head of the family, Zhao Jianzi
(d. ), holding paramount power. In , the Zhao and Han families joined
together to attack the Fan and Zhonghang families, driving the heads of the
families into exile and dividing their lands between their own families. In
, the Zhao and Han families again joined together, this time also with the
Wei family, to attack the Xun family, exterminating it and absorbing its lands
as well. By this time, the territory held by the three remaining families—
Zhao, Han, and Wei—far exceeded that of the Jin lords themselves, and they
held all the power in the state. Finally, at the end of that century, in , the
territories of the three families were recognized by the Zhou king as
independent states. Although the Jin lords would survive for a few decades
longer, for all practical purposes the state of Jin had ceased to exist. From
this time on, it was the three Jin states—Han, Zhao and Wei—that occupied
the center of Warring States China.
In the late 1920s or early 1930s, a set of at least fourteen bronze bells
known as the Biao Qiang zhong was discovered just outside of Luoyang,
Henan. Most of these bells ended up in Japan and are currently housed
at the Senoku Museum in Tokyo (though two bells are also in the collection
of the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto, Canada). Made for a man named
Biao Qiang, the bells carry an inscription that not only mentions the
establishment of Han as an independent state, but also provides the rst
mention of a great wall built by the state of Qi, in modern Shandong
province. Although the date at the beginning of the inscription—twenty-
second year—does not mention which ruler it refers to, the events
recorded thereafter leave no doubt that it is the reign of King Weilie of Zhou
(r. –): i.e., .


Han

It was the twenty-second year, Biao Qiang served as a warrior for his
ruler. The Han lineage was the supreme leader in the campaign against
Qin and attacked Qi, entering into the Great Wall. We rst met up at
Pingyin. Bringing to bear all of the force of the troops, I took Chujing,
and was rewarded by the Han lineage, and commanded by the Duke of
Jin, having audience with the Son of Heaven. I herewith brightly
record it in the inscription. Having been valiant in both martial and
civil aairs, may eternal generations never forget Biaos bells.

These bells were discovered in the heartland of the state of Han, very near
where the Zhou kings had their capital. But just as this location did not prove
to be sustainable for the Zhou kings, it also proved precarious for Han.
Bordering Qin on the west, Chu on the south, Zhao to its north, and Wei to
its east, it was the most exposed of the major states of the time. For instance,
records for the rst two years of the reign of Lord Zhao (r. –) read
Qin defeated our western mountains, and Second year, Song took our
Huangchi; Wei took Zhu. For the state to survive in such an environment
required a government superior to those of the other states. In , Lord
Zhao appointed Shen Buhai (d. ) to be chancellor of the state. Shen Buhai
had been a native of the old state of Zheng. However, shortly after Hans
formal establishment in , it conquered Zheng and moved its capital to
the old city of Zheng, present-day Zhengzhou, Henan. With that, Shen Buhai
too was absorbed into the Han government. Living in the eastern part of the
state, close to the border with Wei, Shen Buhai would have been familiar
with the government reforms introduced there some years earlier by Li Kui
(–). Li Kui was the supposed author of a book called Classic of Law,
in which he argued, among other things, in favor of meritocracy and against
the old system of noble entitlement, with an emphasis on stang the
government with capable ocials. It is said that Li Kuis philosophy of
government was the main inuence on Shang Yang (c. –), who was
the major architect of the government reforms in the mid-fourth century
that made the state of Qin into the major power of the next century and
more, and who was in turn the supposed author of the Book of the Lord
Shang. It is said that when Shang Yang left the state of Wei for Qin in , he
took with him Li Kuis Classic of Law, and used it as the blueprint for his
reforms. In Han, located between Wei and Qin, Shen Buhai instituted similar
reforms, and he too is supposed to have authored a book, known simply
as Master Shen, which however has long been lost. Still, enough early
quotations of the book survive to gain at least some glimpse of his

Hereditary Houses

government philosophy. It is often characterized as being based on
technique or method (shu), and this seems to be short-hand for
bureaucracy. However, whereas bureaucracy is usually seen as focusing on
the members stang it—and it is true that Shen Buhai too counselled
stang the government with capable ocers—he placed the emphasis
instead on the ruler. A Han-dynasty annotated bibliography of ancient
literature characterized his book in the following way:

The philosophy of Master Shen is called form and name. Form and
name is to use names to require substance, thus honoring the ruler
and humbling the minister, exalting superiors and restricting
inferiors.

This notion of form and name was a means whereby the ruler could control
the personnel serving under him, requiring that the form of their
performance match the name, that is, the specications of their oce. An
early quotation of the book Master Shen portrays the ruler as a sort of
puppet-master:

The Master Shen says: The ruler must have clear laws and correct
properties. It is like suspending a balance and weight to measure the
light and heavy, which is what is used to unify the many ministers.

Just as the point from which the balance is suspended does not move, so too,
according to Shen Buhai, once the government apparatus was working
correctly, the ruler would have no need to move, which is to say to intervene
in its workings. Another early quotation explains this, drawing on the
legendary example of the sage-ruler Yao.

Yaos governing was just to clarify the laws and examine the commands
and nothing more. The sage-ruler relies on laws and does not rely on
intelligence, relies on method and does not rely on persuasion. The
Yellow Emperors rule of all under heaven was to put laws in place and
not to change them, causing the people to be content with those laws.

Shen Buhai used another term to explain what was required of the ruler:
wuwei. This is a term that has long perplexed translators. It can mean non-
action, and this is certainly one aspect of Shen Buhais sense. But it has a
more nuanced sense of non-motivated action: that the ruler ought not use


Han

his personal inclinations to aect an outcome. Wuwei is a term that Shen
Buhai may have borrowed from Daoist philosophy, or perhaps Daoist
philosophy borrowed the term from him; most likely, it is a term that was in
general use throughout Warring States China (and perhaps even earlier), but
that dierent thinkers understood in slightly dierent senses. For Shen
Buhai, wuwei was to eliminate all arbitrary decisions from government. One
nal quotation from his book likens the ruler to a mirror or, again, to a
balance:

A mirror reects the essence without doing anything, and the beautiful
and ugly are all apparent in it. A scale nds the balance without doing
anything, and the light and heavy are obtained of themselves.

Shen Buhais notion of wuwei would have a great inuence a century later on
the writings of Han Feizi (c. –), and through them on most subsequent
Chinese governments. But unlike Han Feizi—and also unlike Shang Yang
before him—the other great philosophers credited with the political
philosophy known as Legalism, philosophers who met an untimely and
violent death because of their own attempts to inuence rulers, Shen Buhai
lived to an old age and died a natural death, in .
In , Lord Xuanhui (r. –) followed the practice of the rulers of
the other major states in declaring himself king (wang). Unfortunately, he
had forgotten the principles Shen Buhai advised for the ruler. In , he
allowed Han to get caught up in the struggle between Qin and Chu, the two
major powers to the west and south of Han respectively. Knowing that Qin
was planning to attack Chu, he rst committed to an alliance with Qin. But
then, in the midst of the intrigues, he allowed himself to be persuaded by
Chu to switch allegiance and join with Chu. This of course angered Qin,
which turned its might on Han. Finally, in , the year of King Xuanhuis
death, he did join with Qin in attacking Chu, winning a great victory. But
this victory would prove to be transitory. The following years brought an
almost unending series of attacks on Han by both Qin and Chu; when
attacked by Chu, Han would seek relief from Qin, or when attacked by Qin
would seek relief from Chu, but more often than not the relief was not
forthcoming. Finally, in , under assault from Qin, King An (r. –)
sent Han Feizi, a nobleman of the state and the great theorist of Legalist
philosophy, to Qin to try to persuade King Zheng of Qin (r. /–),
the future First Emperor of Qin, to relent. Although King Zheng appreciated
Han Feizis philosophy of government, through the intrigues of Han Feizis

Hereditary Houses

former classmate Li Si (–), Han Feizi was forced to commit suicide in
the very next year. Three years later, in , Qin attacked Han once again,
taking King An prisoner and absorbing all of the remaining Han territory
into the expanding Qin empire. The state that had come into existence
through warfare went out of existence in the same manner.