CHAPTER
BASIC ANNALS OF ZHOU

The Zhou people, like the Shang, traced their ancestry back to a miraculous
conception. According to their traditions, the woman Jiang Yuan, whose name
means Origin of the Jiang, a family with whom the Zhou intermarried, became
pregnant after having stepped in the footprint of Di or the God on High.
Regarding the child as inauspicious, she several times attempted to abandon
him and even named him Qi (Abandoned), but each time he survived through
the intervention of nature, with horses and oxen refusing to trample him when
he was placed in a road and birds using their wings to warm him when he was
placed on ice. According to the myth, as the child grew he learned to cultivate
grains and beans to feed himself. At the time of the ruler Shun, because the
common people were starving, Shun put Qi in charge of agriculture. He then
taught his skills to others, coming to be known as Hou Ji, the Lord of Millet.
After Qi or Hou Ji, the Zhou genealogy passes through twelve generations,
during which time the Zhou people are said to have lived among the wild
peoples of the north and west. By the time of the Shang king Wu Ding, it is
possible that Zhou enters the historical record proper, there being oraclebone inscriptions about Shang rst attacking a people called Zhou, and then,
somewhat later, having peaceful relations with them. Where this Zhou was
located is a point of contention among modern Chinese historians. Some
historians locate it along the Fen River, a major tributary of the Yellow River
owing through present-day Shanxi province between the Taihang Mountain
range to the east and the north-south stretch of the Yellow River to the west,
an area in frequent contact with Shang about the time of Wu Ding. Many
other historians argue that Zhou was located west of the Yellow River, in the
high plateau area to the north of the Wei River, another major tributary of
the Yellow River. It seems that there is still insucient archaeological
evidence to resolve this debate. Nevertheless, it is clear that shortly after this
time, that is by the mid to late twelfth century, the Zhou people moved still
further west, establishing themselves at an upland plain called Zhouyuan,
the Plain of Zhou. This is the area that they would thereafter always regard

Basic Annals

as their homeland. From this time on for almost three hundred years, there
is plentiful archaeological evidence testifying to their life there.
The Zhous own history of themselves begins with a sagely gure named
Chang, better known as King Wen, who is said to have ruled for fty years
(1099/1056–1050). During the latter part of this half century of rule, Zhou
began to extend its power back toward the east, eventually coming into
contact again with Shang. Both Zhou and Shang traditions hold that Chang
was captured and imprisoned by Di Xin, the last ruler of Shang, but that he
was eventually released and given a mandate to exercise authority over the
Shang western region. This would seem to have been de facto recognition of
the developing situation in that area, over which Shang had eectively lost
control several generations earlier.
Chang died before the Zhou competition with Shang came to its ultimate
conclusion. Nevertheless, he was credited ever after as the rst king of the
Zhou, posthumously referred to as Wen Wang, the Cultured King. He was
succeeded by his son Fa, who would come to be known as Wu Wang, the
Martial King (r. 1049/1045–1043), since it was he who led the Zhou army
in the battle that would defeat Di Xin and bring the Shang dynasty to its
close. All Zhou kings thereafter, and indeed most emperors throughout later
Chinese history, would be known by some similar adjective understood to
characterize their reign.
Numerous Zhou texts, both traditional and archaeologically excavated,
refer to Kings Wen and Wu as the two founders of the dynasty, the father
representing its civil virtues and the son its military power. According to
later traditions, that King Wen died before the conquest absolved him of the
crime of regicide, his son, King Wu, taking on the responsibility for killing
the reigning Shang king. One recently discovered text written on bamboo
strips describes a dream that King Wens wife, Tai Si, had with a clear
premonition of Zhous victory.
Tai Si dreamed of seeing that in the Shang court were brambles, and
then that the young son Fa took the Zhou courts catalpa and planted
it in their midst, transforming into pine and cypress, white oak and
sawtooth oak. She awakened alarmed, and reported it to the king.
Plants and animals, as well as all sorts of celestial and terrestrial phenomena
were thought to be imbued with unique powers to predict the future.
Brambles, a sort of thorn-bush the most pronounced characteristic of
which is its needle-sharp barbs, was a particularly ominous plant. On the

Zhou

other hand, the catalpa is a beautiful, stately deciduous tree, which later came
to be called the king of trees. Pine and cypress, white oak and sawtooth oak,
in their turn, were thought to represent constancy and assistance. That Fa,
i.e., King Wu, planted a catalpa tree in the midst of the brambles growing in
the Shang court is an obvious image of the Zhou conquest, whereas the
brambles transforming into the various lesser trees signied the change of
the Shang from armed opponents into loyal subjects. Since the dream was so
obviously auspicious, modern interpreters of the text have struggled to
understand why Tai Si should have awakened alarmed; could she not see
that it portended the Zhou victory? The answer seems obvious: that the
victory would be achieved by Fa, the son, meant that King Wen, Tai Sis
husband, would die before it could happen.
The conquest was not long in coming after King Wens death. Within just a
few years, King Wu led the Zhou army on campaign to the east, crossing the
Tongguan Pass through the mountains that separate the modern provinces of
Shaanxi to the west and Henan to the east, coming out into the north China
plain very near to Erlitou, which many historians say was the capital of the Xia
dynasty, and then turning north to cross the Yellow River at a place called
Mengjin Ford. Having crossed the Yellow River, the Zhou army was within just
a few days march of the Shang capital region. The two armies met at a place
called Muye, Shepherds Wild, just southwest of modern Anyang. The Zhou
won a decisive victory, though there are conicting accounts as to how bloody
the battle was. The earliest account, probably dating not too much later than
the event itself, describes horrendous Shang casualties, later described as the
eld being drenched in blood. On the other hand, the later Confucian
philosopher Mencius (c. –) rejected any suggestion of bloodshed,
saying that when the most virtuous of rulers met the most despicable, the
latters soldiers would lay down their arms and gladly accept defeat.
It is probably irrelevant just how bloody the battle may have been. It has
always been viewed as one of the great turning points in Chinese history,
when in a single day one dynasty was decisively brought to an end and
another began. Modern historians in China have shed a great deal of ink
trying to determine when that day was. According to the chronology used in
this book, it was January , 1045 BCE. It is important to note that that date
is by no means universally accepted, but it cant be too far wrong, if at all.
While we might be able to pinpoint the exact date of the battle at
Shepherds Wild, it would be mistaken to think that the Shang army just
laid down its weapons and that the state ceased to exist. This is not to say
that Zhou did not win a great victory. However, after King Wu returned with

Basic Annals

his army to the Zhou homeland, some seven hundred kilometers to the west,
there remained a powerful Shang presence throughout the area east of the
mountains (i.e., the Taihang Mountains). King Wu is said to have deputed
three of his younger brothers to oversee population centers within this area,
in the case of the Shang capital region doing so in partnership with Di Xins
surviving son Wu Geng. When King Wu died, more or less suddenly, just two
years later, and yet another brother, Dan, the Duke of Zhou, assumed power
in the Zhou capital, Zhou rule, not yet very stable, was thrown into turmoil;
the brothers in the east, deeply suspicious of the Duke of Zhou, joined in
rebellion with their Shang subjects. This precipitated a civil war that is said
to have lasted three years, but which did have the salutary eect of decisively
consolidating Zhou rule of the entire eastern region, stretching to the sea in
present-day Shandong province, and north as far as present-day Beijing, the
northern entrance to the North China Plain.
King Wu is also said to have had a dream, though perhaps more
guratively than the literal dream that Tai Si, King Wens wife, is reported as
having had: King Wu dreamed of establishing a new capital alongside the
Luo River in the northwestern corner of present-day Henan province. This
was very near where he had crossed the Yellow River with the Zhou army on
the way to their fateful battle with Di Xin and the Shang army, and also just
a few dozen kilometers from Erlitou, said to have been the capital of the Xia
dynasty (though it is doubtful that anyone alive at that time was aware of
that site, which had been destroyed already some ve hundred years earlier).
Perhaps the most important thing about this proposed new capital—at
Luoyang—was that it was at the center of the territory that the Zhou now
controlled. Indeed, one bronze vessel, called the He zun (bronze vessels are
conventionally referred to by the name of the patron for whom they were
cast and by the type of vessel; here He is the patrons name and zun is the
type of vessel, a wine serving vessel), cast just a few years later bears an
inscription in which King Wus son, King Cheng (the Completed King; r.
1042/1035–1006), addressed a group of young Zhou leaders assembled there
and referred to the area as the central region (zhong yu or zhong guo), the
latter of these two pronunciations regarded as the rst reference to the name
by which China is typically known: Zhongguo, the Middle Kingdom.
It was when the king rst moved (his) residence to Chengzhou and
again received King Wus abundant blessing from heaven. In the fourth
month, bingxu (day ), the king addressed the ancestral young
princes in the Capital Chamber, saying:

Zhou

In the past, your deceased-fathers and elders were capable of
assisting King Wen. And so King Wen received this great mandate. It
was after King Wu had conquered the great city Shang, then (he)
respectfully reported to Heaven, saying:
I shall reside (in) this central region (and) from it govern the
people.
Wuhu! Although you are but young princes without experience,
look upon the elders merit with respect to Heaven, and carry out the
commands and reverently make oerings! Help the king make rm
his virtue so that Heaven may look favorably upon our weakness.
The king completed the address. He was awarded cowries, thirty
strands, and herewith makes for Lord Yan this treasured oertory
vessel. It is the kings fth ritual cycle.
As just mentioned, King Wu was succeeded by his eldest son, Song, who
would be known as King Cheng, the Completed King. It was during his
reign that the eastern capital at Luoyang was established, and the city there
was known throughout Zhou times as Chengzhou, the Completed Zhou,
whether in reference to this kings eorts or not. According to tradition, the
rst years of King Chengs reign were dominated by the Duke of Zhou,
ruling in his stead as regent. To whatever extent this was actually the case, or
simply reected dierent parties contending for power, it seems clear that
King Cheng did eventually assume complete control of the Zhou governing
apparatus. Among other eects of King Chengs rule, which continued for
thirty-seven years, was rm establishment of the principle of primogeniture:
succession by the kings eldest son. It was probably at this time that the Zhou
kings came to be called Tianzi, the Son of Heaven, and also at this time that
the Zhou claimed that their rule was mandated by Heaven. This was the
inception of the Mandate of Heaven, which would be used by all subsequent
dynasties to justify their right to rule.
Son of Heaven or not, King Cheng was able to rule the extensive eastern
territories the Zhou had conquered through a sort of colonization, deputing
his uncles and brothers and old allies of the Zhou to move with their kinsmen
east and establish their own city-states at militarily strategic locations. Thus,
Lord Feng of Kang, one of the kings uncles, was installed in the former
Shang capital region; this would become the state of Wi. Dan, the Duke of
Zhou, was given an area further east, just at the base of the imposing Mount
Tai in present-day Shandong province; this was the state of Lu. The Grand
Duke Wang, not a blood relative of the Zhou house but the commander of

Basic Annals

the Zhou army at the battle of Muye, was sent to an area further north; this
was the state of Qi. Still further north, near the site of present-day Beijing,
guarding the northern entrance to the north China plain, Duke Shi of Shao,
another son of King Wen (though by a secondary consort), established the
city-state of Yan; the Duke of Shao would join the Duke of Zhou as King
Chengs most important advisers. Two of King Chengs younger brothers
were sent to colonize areas to the north and south of the eastern capital at
Chengzhou: Shu Yu was sent to the valley of the Fen River in Shanxi province,
establishing the state of Jin, while another brother, whose name is unknown,
was sent into the mountainous area of central Henan province, where he
established the state of Ying. Other relatives and allies established scores of
other city-states. During the Western Zhou dynasty, these colonies would be
at least nominally under the control of the Zhou king. They would later
develop into the independent states of the Eastern Zhou dynasty, about
which we will speak later.
King Cheng was succeeded in turn by his eldest son, Zhao, who would be
known as King Kang, the Peaceful King (r. 1005–). Inscribed bronze
vessels from these two reigns attest that they were not particularly peaceful,
as Zhou armies consolidated their control throughout north China.
According to these inscriptions, all of the Zhou eorts were successful, as
they probably were. However, it is also worth remembering that bronze
vessels were cast to commemorate successes, and not failures. The lack of
any inscriptional testimony to Zhou failures ought not to be understood to
mean that there were no Zhou failures. Indeed, in the fourth or fth reign of
the dynasty (depending on whether King Wen or King Wu is considered as
the rst reigning king), Jia, the eldest son of King Kang succeeded to rule,
known as King Zhao, the Radiant King (r. /–). While numerous
bronze vessels from his time bear inscriptions about one or perhaps two
military campaigns that he led south into present-day Hubei province, it is
only from veiled allusions in later texts that we learn that one of these
campaigns resulted in a great Zhou defeat, in the course of which the Western
Six Armies were decimated and the king himself was drowned in the Han
River. This campaign would mark the high-water mark of Zhou rule.
Thereafter, direct Zhou control would be limited to the two capital areas, the
original capital along the Wei River in present-day Shaanxi province and the
new capital along the Luo River in present-day Henan province, though they
would continue to maintain indirect control over their colonies established
at strategic locations throughout north and central China for almost another
two centuries.

Zhou

A second result of King Zhaos disastrous southern campaign would have
even greater and even longer lasting implications for Zhou rule. King Zhao
was succeeded by his eldest son, Man, known as King Mu, the Ripened
King (r. –). We can imagine that King Mu, presumably still quite
young when rule was suddenly thrust upon him, faced an existential threat,
with much of the Zhou army destroyed and many of the elders of the state
dead. In traditional histories of Zhou rule, the only things that we learn
about King Mus lengthy reign are that he traveled extensively into what is
now known as Central Asia, apparently engaging there in some sort of a
romance with the Western Queen Mother, and that he established a law code
for the state. We can probably disregard the rst of these as nothing more
than the stu of legend. The second point may also be more legend than real,
but there is substantial evidence, even if all circumstantial, in the numerous
vessels bronze vessels cast during his reign, that King Mu did oversee a
radical reorganization of Zhou rule.
A group of vessels cast on behalf of a man named Li, the scion of an old
Zhou family named Shan, may be the rst indication of this reorganization
of Zhou rule. This family was not well known when these vessels were
discovered in 1955 in Meixian, a county on the south side of the Wei River
about a hundred kilometers to the west of the capital region at present-day
Xian and just across from the Zhou homeland known as the Zhouyuan.
However, over the next several decades, many more bronze vessels with
long inscriptions cast on behalf of Lis descendants would be found there,
showing that the family was an important support to the Zhou kings
throughout the entirety of the Western Zhou dynasty. One of the vessels cast
for Li, known as the Li fangyi, commemorates Lis appointment to take
control of both the Six Armies, which seem to have been a sort of royal
bodyguard stationed in the vicinity of the western capital, and also the Yin
Eight Armies, armies made up of non-Zhou soldiers stationed near the
eastern capital Chengzhou. The inscription on the vessel records Lis
investiture. From this time until the end of the Western Zhou, investitures of
this sort would be the most frequent occasion for the casting of the most
important inscribed bronze vessels. The Li fangyi inscription is an excellent
example of this sort of investiture inscription, diering from the great
majority of other such inscriptions only in that in addition to recording the
kings speech, it also features Lis spoken response to the king. This might
reect the power being vested in him, and perhaps also his senior status
vis--vis the young King Mu.

Basic Annals

It was the eighth month, rst auspiciousness; the king entered into the
Zhou Temple. Duke Mu at the right of Li stood in the center of the
courtyard, facing north. The king in writing commanded Yin to award
Li red knee-pads, a black girdle-pendant, and bit and bridle, saying:
Herewith supervise the royally enacted Three Supervisors of the
Six Armies: the Supervisor of Lands, Supervisor of the Horse and
Supervisor of Work.
The king commanded Li, saying:
Concurrently supervise the Six Armies and the Eight Armies seals.
Li bowed and touched his head to the ground, daring in response to
extol the kings benecence, herewith making for my cultured
grandfather Lord Yi this treasured oertory vessel. Li said: The Son of
Heaven is very blessed and very well-founded, for ten thousand years
protecting our ten thousand states. Li dares to bow and touch his
head to the ground, saying: Array my person to continue my
predecessors treasured service.
Many other inscriptions from King Mus time and thereafter suggest that
Lis appointment to take command of the Zhou armies would mark an
important transition in the way the Zhou state was governed. Up to this
time, the Zhou kings seem to have called upon their close relatives to
perform whatever service was required at any given time, seemingly a good
example of what Max Weber referred to as patrimonial rule. However, from
this time on bronze inscriptions show that the Zhou government came to be
staed by people appointed to designated oces, presumably more on the
basis of their qualications than on their blood relationship with the king;
this seems to be the beginning of bureaucratic rule, which would
characterize most governments in China ever after.
King Mus rule, or perhaps that of his son, Yihu, known as King Gong, the
Supported King (r. –), also marked the beginning of other changes
in Zhou lives. Probably the most important of these were changes in the
ritual system upon which Zhou society was based. This is now generally
referred to in studies of Western Zhou history as the Ritual Reform or even
Ritual Revolution. This may sound like a religious reformation, and in
some ways it was. But unlike the Protestant Reformation in Europe, the
Western Zhou Ritual Reform was not a matter of belief, but was almost
wholly concerned with practice. Prior to this time, rituals surrounding

Zhou

burials and the ongoing cult to the ancestors were celebrated by (male)
members of a family; even if these families were not just the nuclear family
with which we are now familiar, it probably did not include more members
than those living together. However, after the Ritual Reform, ritual
celebrations came to be multi-media spectacles, with large audiences
observing musicians playing drums and bells and chime-stones suspended
from racks and ritual specialists celebrating oerings at altars on which were
arrayed sets of bronze vessels, graduated in size and diering in function. It
goes without saying that the musicians required expert knowledge to play
their instruments, the bells of which featured two separate tones an octave
apart, depending on where on the bell they were struck. The priests at the
altar presumably also required specialized knowledge of how to perform
their ceremonies. These changes in the performance of rituals paralleled the
bureaucratization of the Zhou government. They too would last throughout
the Zhou dynasty, and indeed long thereafter.
While events in the reign of King Mu are reasonably well reported in the
traditional historical record, that record is all but silent concerning his son,
King Gong. In fact, for the next three kings as well, King Yih, the Steady King
(r. –), the son of King Gong; King Xiao, the Filial King (r. –),
who anomalously among all Western Zhou kings was not his predecessors
son but rather his uncle; and King Yi, the Even King (r. –), King Yihs
son, Records of the Historian says nothing more than the following:
When King Gong died, his son Jian, King Yih, came to power. In King
Yihs time, the royal court declined and the poets composed satires.
When King Yih died, King Gongs younger brother Bifang came to
power; this was King Xiao. When King Xiao died, the many lords
installed Xie, the son of King Yih. This was King Yi. When King Yi
died, his son Hu, King Li, came to power.
If it were not for inscribed bronze vessels from the time, which have been
unearthed in considerable number over the last four or ve decades, there
would be almost nothing to add to this. As it is, the bronze inscriptions
provide more information about general tendencies than they do about
specic events. The trend toward bureaucratization of the government noted
above for the reign of King Mu certainly grew ever stronger. On the other
hand, there are signs of a general breakdown of social order. A new type of
bronze inscription makes its rst appearance at this time: commemorations
of victories in law suits, especially those involving land disputes. Although

Basic Annals

these bronze inscriptions are not at all as plentiful as the investiture
inscriptions mentioned above, they seem to suggest that an increase in
population brought competition for natural resources, especially land, in the
capital regions, and especially that of the Wei River valley. The inscription on
the Qiu Wei ding is representative of these court cases.
It was the rst month, rst auspiciousness, gengxu (day ), Wei took
the States-lord Li to court before the Elder of Jing, Elder Yifu, the Elder
of Ding, the Elder of Liang, and Elder Sufu, saying: I am in charge of
King Gongs irrigation works to the east of the Great Chamber of Shao
going northward to the two rivers of Rong. Li had said: I will give you
ve elds.
The ocials then interrogated Li, saying: Did you sell the elds or
not? Li conceded saying: I sold all ve elds. The Elder of Jing, Elder
Yifu, the Elder of Ding, the Elder of Liang, and Elder Sufu then reached
a verdict, making Li swear an oath. Then they commanded the three
supervisors: Supervisor of Lands Yiren Fu, Supervisor of the Horse
Shanren Bang, Supervisor of Works Fu Ju, and the Interior Scribes
associate Si Zou to survey Qiu Weis four elds of Li, and to give him
his home at his city: the northern boundary as far as the Li elds; the
eastern boundary as far as the San elds; the southern boundary as far
as the San elds and Zhengfu elds; and the western boundary as far
as the Li elds.
States-lord Li gave all of these elds to Qiu Wei. Lis youngest son
Su, Lis supervisors Shen Ji, Qing Gui, Bin Biao, Gan of Xing, Changyi
of Jing, and Weis young son Zhu Qi feasted me.
Wei herewith makes for my cultured deceased-father this treasured
caldron. May Wei for ten thousand years eternally treasure and use it.
It is the kings fth year.
It is unclear who the States-lord Li of this inscription was, but that he bore
the title of States-lord suggests that he was a man of some prominence, and
the inscription certainly indicates that he had extensive land holdings, at
least prior to this trial.
Of course, inscriptions such as that on the Qiu Wei ding provide only
anecdotal evidence. There are no statistics from this early period, nor does
archaeology provide any real information about economic developments.
However, it seems clear that some old established families fell into decline,
their lands being carved up among other families. There is also some

Zhou

evidence that some of the people who worked those lands absconded.
Although it is not clear where they may have gone, it is perhaps a reasonable
guess that they migrated eastward, where the former colonies were growing
increasingly estranged from the capital region, all but declaring their
independence from the greater Zhou state.
There are even more subtle hints of turmoil in the middle of this period.
A great many bronze vessels that surely date to the rst decades of the ninth
century contain full dates, which is to say the year of reign, month, phase of
the moon (one of four discrete notations that seem to refer to the new moon,
the full moon, and the waxing and waning half-moons), and the day in the
cycle of sixty days used in ancient China. While there are questions about all
four of the elements within these date notations, it should be possible to use
them to reconstruct the calendar of the period, and especially the regnal
calendars of the kings. However, the dates are too numerous and too
contradictory to t within the three or four decades when they must have
been cast, unless one posits some overlap between them. This led David S.
Nivison (1923–2014), one of the most creative scholars of the chronology of
the period, to suggest that the anomalous succession from King Yih to his
uncle King Xiao was brought about by a crisis at court, and that King Yih was
forced to ee to a place known in the received literature as Feiqiu, the Waste
Mound while his uncle, King Xiao, declared himself king in the capital. King
Yih continued to live in exile for another decade. Adherents of both kings
cast bronze vessels using two dierent regnal calendars such that there could
be two dierent dates for the same year. While this suggestion is entirely
hypothetical, not only does it resolve the problem of the contradictory date
notations in the contemporary bronze inscriptions, but it is also consistent
with the greater social and political trends of the time.
Although the legitimate succession was restored with the reign of King Yi,
this did not stop the deterioration of royal power. Other traditional histories
than just that of Records of the Historian report mainly that King Yi was sickly
and that his reign did not last long (in fact, it almost certainly lasted only
eight years). Although Records of the Historian, quoted above, indicates that
it was the many lords who installed him in power, apparently in an attempt
to restore the regular succession, their support was not reciprocated by the
new king. A record in the Bamboo Annals states that just two years after his
installation, the king executed the Lord of Qi, boiling him in a bronze caldron.
Of course, we can only guess at the context of this event, if it is even true at
all, but it certainly seems consistent with the increasing deterioration in
relations between the royal court in the west and the eastern states.

Basic Annals

Social unrest certainly reached a boil during the reign of King Yis son
Hu, known as King Li, the Terrible King (r. /–/). Given King
Yis short reign, it is likely that King Li came to power when still very young,
and indeed there is some evidence in the Bamboo Annals and also in fully
dated bronze inscriptions that he restarted his regnal calendar a few years
after originally succeeding his father, perhaps indicative of his coming of
age. In any event, his regnal calendar confused Sima Qian, the author of
Records of the Historian, and with that also threw into doubt the chronology
of all preceding kings. This confusion has persisted to the present time.
According to Records of the Historian, other historical texts, and even
contemporary poetry, the problems of King Lis reign began with his
preference for one minister named the Duke of Rong over another: Rui
Liangfu. There is a criticism attributed to Rui Liangfu suggesting that the
disagreement between these two ministers stemmed from one of the
perennial debates of economic policy: over taxation and the redistribution
of wealth. Rui Liangfu is quoted as saying:
Will the royal court debase itself? The Duke of Rong loves to monopolize
prots but is not aware of their great diculty. Prots are produced by
the hundred things and supported by heaven and earth. For one to
monopolize them, the harm will be great indeed. Heaven and earth and
the hundred things are for all to take; how can it be acceptable to
monopolize them! Those angered will be extremely many, but he is not
prepared for the great diculty. To advise the king in this way, how will
the king endure for long! One who is king of the people is one who
directs prots and distributes them to high and low. . . . Now if the king
learns to monopolize prots, will it be acceptable! If a common person
were to monopolize prots, he would be called a bandit. If the king
were to do it, his followers would be few indeed. If you make use of the
Duke of Rong, Zhou will surely be ruined.
As the story goes, the king paid no attention to Rui Liangfus argument, and
instead employed the Duke of Rong, increasing taxes and treating the people
cruelly. Others, including the Duke of Shao, the descendant of one of the
founding fathers of the dynasty, also remonstrated against the king to no
avail.
This was not the only problem besieging the Zhou court. Contemporary
bronze inscriptions record that the royal army was dispatched to defend
against incursions from the south that reached almost to the eastern capital

Zhou

at Luoyang. However, in something extremely rare, at least one of these
bronze inscriptions, that on the Yu ding, states that this royal army was
defeated, and was only rescued when one Duke Wu, the Martial Duke,
apparently the ruler of one of the eastern states, now all but independent of
the royal house, sent his own army to stop the invasion. The inscription
reects the crisis facing the Zhou state at this time.
Yu said, Illustrious and great august ancestor Duke Mu was capable of
standing beside and assisting the prior kings and settling the four
quarters. And so, Duke Wu also did not put at a distance or forget my
sagely grandfather and deceased-father Youdashu and Yishu,
commanding Yu to continue my grandfather and deceased-fathers
governance in the country of Jing. And so, Yu also does not dare be
disordered and myopic in supporting my rulers command.
Wuhu, oh woe! Because heaven has sent down great destruction on
the region below, and also since the Lord of E, the Border Protector,
has led the Southern Huai Peoples and the Eastern Peoples broadly to
attack our southern regions and eastern regions as far as Lihan, the
king then commanded the Western Six Armies and the Yin Eight
Armies, saying, Tear apart and attack the Lord of E, the Border
Protector; do not leave old or young.
And so, the armies were ever more fearful and trembling, and did
not succeed in attacking E. And so, Duke Wu then dispatched Yu to
lead one hundred of the dukes war chariots, two hundred charioteers,
and one thousand infantry, saying, In rescuing my resolute plan, assist
the Western Six Armies and the Yin Eight Armies to attack the Lord of
E, the Border Protector. Do not leave old or young.
When Yu took Duke Wus infantry and chariotry and advanced as
far as E, ramming and attacking E, he was victorious, capturing their
leader, the Border Protector. And so, Yu, having had success, dares in
response to extol Duke Wus illustrious dazzling glory, herewith
making this great treasured caldron. May Yu for ten thousand years
have sons sons and grandsons grandsons to treasure and use it.
Meanwhile, the Bamboo Annals says that the western capital region was
also coming under attack by warriors from further to the north and west.
This attack was successfully repelled, as might be attested by yet another
bronze inscription that many historians think dates to this time, but it would
not be the end of the threat.

Basic Annals

Eventually, in , the earliest commonly accepted date in Chinese
history, the people and the great families rose up against King Li, driving
him into exile well away from the royal capital. While the king was in exile,
control of the state fell to one He, the Elder of Gong, another great family,
though one that had come to prominence much more recently than that of
the Duke of Shao. This interregnum, which lasted for fourteen years, brought
the great families enough time to re-establish the royal court, if only
temporarily. When King Li died, still in exile, He, the Elder of Gong, restored
King Lis son, Jing, known posthumously as King Xuan, the Announced
King (r. –). King Xuan would rule for forty-six years, longer than any
other Zhou king. His reign would begin with great promise that the former
glories of the state could be restored, but by the end of his reign the forces
pulling the state apart would prove to be inexorable.
Although King Xuan, like his father King Li, must have come to power as
a very young man, he seems to have navigated the early years of his reign
more successfully than did his father. Virtually the only thing that Records of
the Historian says about this time is that he modeled himself on the founding
kings of the dynasty, Kings Wen, Wu, Cheng and Kang, and that the many
lords, meaning the rulers of the now all but independent states in the east,
presented themselves at court once again. Again, the Bamboo Annals is more
informative, noting military campaigns against the western enemies, now
given the name Xianyun, almost surely a transcription of one enemys name
in a non-Sinitic language, in the third and fth year of his reign. At least the
note for the fth year has been conrmed by a contemporary bronze
inscription. In the sixth year, the royal army turned its attention to the
threat on the southeastern front. These campaigns seem to bespeak a young
king taking the initiative to reclaim the extensive territories rst conquered
by those founding kings of the dynasty. However, in the twelfth year of his
reign, two dierent events occurred that probably suggest that this restoration
would not be a simple matter. The events point to two threats aecting the
royal court: one external and one internal. Although these two events
themselves can be dated to the twelfth year, the threats to the Zhou royal
house were not momentary, but rather would continue to develop throughout
the remainder of the dynasty, which would end decisively less than fty
years later.
First, a series of bronze vessels with lengthy inscriptions indicate that
there were further hostilities with the Xianyun, but this time certainly
initiated by the Xianyun. One of the inscriptions, on the Duo You ding,
makes it clear that the Zhou forces reacted only after a Xianyun attack once

Zhou

again reached almost to the gates of the western capital. Once again, Duke
Wu had to dispatch his own army to the rescue, under the leadership of Duo
You, who may have been a younger brother of King Xuan. The second
problem to beset King Xuan in the twelfth year of his reign was the death of
yet another Duke Wu: this one the ruler of the state of Lu (the name meaning
Martial Duke was popular for rulers of many states). Lu, located in the
southwestern part of present-day Shandong province, at the foot of Mount
Tai, the holiest of Chinese mountains, had been founded by Dan, the Duke
of Zhou, at the very beginning of the dynasty, in the immediate aftermath of
the civil war following King Wus death. Ruled by the direct descendants of
the Duke of Zhou, Lu enjoyed prestige far beyond what its modest size might
otherwise deserve. There are records suggesting that King Xuan attempted
to inuence which of Duke Wus two sons should succeed him to rule in the
state: the elder son Kuo, who would ordinarily be the default choice, or the
younger Xi, who was favored by King Xuan. The prime minister Fanzhong
Shanfu advised the king against intruding in this succession. Fanzhong
Shanfus advice is a classic example of both the political philosophy of the
time and also the style of argumentation.
To discard the elder and install the younger is improper; being
improper, it will surely overturn the kings mandate, and overturning
the kings mandate will surely result in killing him. Therefore, in
issuing commands you cannot be improper. When commands are not
put into eect the government will not stand, and when put into eect
improperly the people will reject their superiors. For inferiors to serve
superiors and for the younger to serve the older is what is proper. Now
if the Son of Heaven determines the lord, installing the younger, this
will teach the people to be contrary. If Lu does not submit to him, the
other lords will imitate them and the kings mandate will be obstructed.
If they do not submit to him and kill him, this would be you yourself
killing the kings mandate. Killing him you lose, and not killing him
you lose. My Lord should consider it.
The king did not pay any attention to his ministers advice, installing the
younger brother Xi. Ten years later the people of Lu rebelled against Xi,
assassinated him, and installed Boyu, the son of the elder brother Kuo, as the
legitimate ruler of Lu. After another ten years, King Xuan personally led an
army east into present-day Shandong to attack Lu, killing Boyu, and installing
the surviving son of Duke Wu to be the new lord. According to Records of the

Basic Annals

Historian, the result of all of this interference in the aairs of a de facto
independent state was that the rulers of most of the other states turned
against the royal commands, just as Fanzhong Shanfu had predicted twenty
years before.
In China, there is an old saying that the earth does not cherish its
treasures, originally used to justify the mining of precious metals and stones,
but now more commonly used with respect to archaeological discoveries
being unearthed. In 1993, tomb robbers in Houma, Shanxi opened a tomb in
the cemetery of early rulers of the state of Jin, one of the old Zhou colonies
founded at the beginning of the dynasty and one that would go on to become
the strongest state of the Springs and Autumns period from the seventh
century through the early fth century. The tomb robbers stole from the
tomb fourteen bronze bells inscribed with a very lengthy inscription showing
that they were made for Su, Lord of Jin. Although the inscription, the Jin Hou
Su bianzhong, does not mention Lu specically, the place names mentioned
in it are all in Lu, and the dates mentioned in it correspond to when King
Xuan led his campaign there to oust Boyu as the ruler of Lu.
It was the kings thirty-third year. The king personally toured and
inspected the eastern states and the southern states. In the rst month,
after the growing brightness, wuwu (day ), the king walked from
Zongzhou. In the second month, after the full moon, guimao (day ,
sic), the king entered into Chengzhou. In the second month, after the
dying brightness, renyin (day ), the king continued going to the east.
In the third month, at the dying brightness, the king commanded Su,
Lord of Jin:
Lead your armies leftward crossing Huo and to the north crossing
. . . to attack the Su barbarians.
Su, Lord of Jin cut o heads and captured prisoners. The
king arrived at Xun Citadel. The king personally inspected the armies
from a distance. The king arrived at the Lord of Jins camp. The king
descended from his chariot and, standing facing south, personally
commanded Su, Lord of Jin: From the northwest corner, ram and
attack Xun Citadel. Su, Lord of Jin led his secondary legion, young
princes, and spearmen to advance and descend entering into it, cutting
o heads and capturing prisoners. The king arrived at Naolie.
The barbarians of Naolie went out eeing. The king commanded Su,
Lord of Jin: Lead the Grand Chambers junior vassals and charioteers
to follow, and catch and pursue them. The Lord of Jin cut o

Zhou

heads and captured prisoners. The Grand Chambers junior vassals
and charioteers cut o heads and captured prisoners.
It was when the king turned back, returning to Chengzhou. The
lords legions arranged the Army Palace. In the sixth month, rst
auspiciousness, wuyin (day ), at dawn the king entered the Grand
Chamber and assumed position. The king called out to the Provisioner
Hu, saying: Summon Su, Lord of Jin. (Lord Jin) entered the gate and
stood in the middle of the court. The king personally awarded him
four colts. Su bowed and touched his head to the ground, and accepting
the horses then exited. Turning around he entered, bowing and
touching his head to the ground. On dinghai (day ), at dawn the
king was in charge at the citys Attack Palace. On gengyin (day ), at
dawn the king entered the Grand Chamber. Supervisor of Works
Yangfu entered at the right of Su, Lord of Jin. The king personally
presented Su, Lord of Jin with one bucket of black-millet sweet-wine,
a bow and one hundred arrows, and four horses.
Su dares to extol the Son of Heavens illustrious and ne benecence,
herewith making these prime concordant yang bronze bells, with
which to summon to approach the prior cultured men. May the prior
cultured men be strict on high and respected below, abundantly
sending down on me much good fortune. May Su for ten thousand
years without bound have sons sons and grandsons grandsons
eternally to treasure these bells.
Jin, the state closest to the Zhou royal capitals Zongzhou (the western
capital near present-day Xian) and Chengzhou, was just developing into a
power in its own right, and positioned itself as a fervent supporter of the
Zhou royal house. However, even with the military support of Jin, the Zhou
royal army was defeated in a series of battles over the course of the next ten
years. As the fortunes of his rule declined, King Xuan grew paranoid. In ,
he ordered that the ruler of the small state of Du, known as the Elder of Du,
be executed, apparently because of a dream the king had had. Just before he
was killed, the Elder of Du issued a prediction that others later throughout
Chinese history would also repeat:
Milord wishes to kill me though I am innocent. If the dead have no
consciousness, then it will end with that. But if the dead have
consciousness, then within three years I will certainly cause milord to
know of it.

Basic Annals

Three years later, in , King Xuan was out hunting when the Elder of Du
appeared, and shot him in the chest with an arrow. While later Chinese
literature treats this as a ghost story, it is more likely that this Elder of Du
was the previous lords son, who would also have been known as the Elder of
Du and who had ed into exile in Jin when his father was executed.
Regardless of the actual cause, King Xuan did die in this year, bringing his
long reign to a close.
He was succeeded by his son, King You, the Somber King (r. –),
who would be the last king of the dynasty. His short reign has also provided
plentiful grist for the mill of later Chinese ction. The most famous of the
stories concerns his concubine Bao Si, with whom the king became
enamored. She is supposed to have been hard to please, rarely smiling.
However, one day the beacon res were lit indicating that the country was
under attack; allies came rushing to defend the capital, only to nd that it
was a false alarm. Bao Si found this very funny, not only smiling but even
laughing. The king then had the beacon res lit repeatedly, though soon the
allies grew tired of the game. When eventually the country really was under
attack, none of them came, the capital was sacked and the king was killed. Of
course, this is all a fairy tale, designed to blame a woman for the fall of the
dynasty. Still, there appears to have been at least a kernel of truth in the story.
There does seem to have been a concubine named Bao Si, for whom King
You deposed his original queen, the daughter of the ruler of the state of
Shen, theretofore an important ally of the Zhou kings. What is more, he also
replaced the son of the queen from Shen, Yi Jiu, with the son of Bao Si, Bo
Pan, as crown prince. Needless to say, this angered the ruler of Shen, who
then joined with others, including the western enemies of Zhou, to overthrow
King You. A recently unearthed manuscript written in the fourth century
BCE, given the name Annals (Xinian) by its modern editors, narrates these
events, providing some new information but also raising new questions.
King You of Zhou took as wife a woman from Western Shen, who gave
birth to King Ping (the Calm King). The king then took a girl of the
Bao people; this was Bao Si, who gave birth to Bo Pan. Bao Si was
beloved of the king, and the king and Bo Pan drove o King Ping, who
ed to Western Shen. King You raised the army and surrounded King
Ping at Western Shen, but the people of Shen would not give him up.
The people of Zeng then surrendered to the Western Rong, and with
them attacked King You; King You and Bo Pan were then destroyed,
and Zhou came to an end. The states-lords and many governors then

Zhou

installed King Yous younger brother Yu Chen at Guo; this was King
Hui (the Kind King) of Xie, who reigned for twenty-one years. Qiu,
Lord Wen (the Cultured Lord) of Jin, then killed King Hui at Guo. For
nine years Zhou was without a king, and the states-lords and many
governors thereupon began not to come to court at Zhou. The Lord of
Jin then met King Ping at Shaoe, and installed him in the Capital
Encampment. In the third year, he then moved east, settling at
Chengzhou.
It is clear from this account that there was both a period of time during
which there were two dierent kings of Zhou, King Hui, the Kind King
(r. –), the younger brother of King You, and King Ping, the Even
King (r. –), the son of the queen from Shen, and also a period of nine
years during which there was no king, at least no king in the capital. The
account is ambiguous about this latter point, and modern scholars have
proposed dierent interpretations, none of which is wholly convincing.
Nevertheless, it is certain that the court of King You was riven by at least two
dierent factions, with the state of Guo supporting the king, while the state
of Jin joined Shen and other states to support Yi Jiu, the son of the queen
from Shen. This was perhaps the rst manifestation of the wars between the
states that would characterize the next ve hundred years of the Zhou
dynasty, traditionally termed the Eastern Zhou period, since the king had
moved to the eastern capital at Chengzhou—modern Luoyang in Henan.
The Zhou dynasty persisted through another twenty-one kings after King
Ping, but the period brought a progressive weakening of the Zhou kings
power, to the point that he was eventually a mere gurehead. There were
several more cases of intra-family ghting, as for instance between the sons
of King Xi (the Awarded King; r. –), Lang and Tui, who battled back
and forth for ve years, each claiming to be king, before Lang was nally
conclusively installed as King Hui (the Kind King; r. –; not to be
confused with King Hui of Xie), or between the two sons of King Hui
himself, Zheng and Shu Dai, who similarly each claimed to be king, calling
on dierent allies, including in Shu Dais case the non-Chinese mountain
people living to the north of the capital region. Zheng eventually called on
the state of Jin, which by this time had become the real power in north
China, for support; Duke Wen (the Cultured Duke; r. –) of Jin
reinstated Zheng as King Xiang (the Uplifted King; r. –) as king and
killed Shu Dai. Duke Wen then subjected King Xiang to the indignity of
summoning him to an audience at the Jin city Heyang. Although the ocial

Basic Annals

annals of the time referred to this euphemistically as The king took an
inspection tour to Heyang, everyone understood that the power now lay
with the lords of the states, especially those recognized as premier (ba), as
was Duke Wen of Jin. The last king to rule, King Nan (the Blushing King;
r. –), saw the capital itself divided into two separate cities, West Zhou
and East Zhou (not to be confused with the Western Zhou and Eastern Zhou
periods). Caught between the major powers to the north and east of him,
which were the successor states to the former state of Jin, and the rising
power of the west, the state of Qin, King Nan, ensconced in the city of West
Zhou, tried to pit all sides against each other, to no avail. When he died in
BCE, the term used to describe his death was no longer the term
reserved for kings, but rather the simple verb to die, indicating that he was
no longer recognized as a king; indeed, the name by which he is known to
history, King Nan, is not one of the traditional posthumous names used for
Zhou kings. Seven years after his death, in , Qin took over the city of East
Zhou as well, bringing a quiet end to what would prove to be Chinas longest
dynasty, stretching just over or under eight hundred years, depending on
how one denes its beginning.