CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF DING JIANG

Ding Jiang was a woman of the state of Qi who became the wife of Lord
Ding of Wei (r. –). Unlike all too many women mentioned in early
Chinese texts, and especially in the Zuo Tradition history of the Springs and
Autumns period, who are portrayed as almost irredeemably evil, Ding Jiang
was universally respected for her wise counsel, rst to her husband, and then
after his death to the various ministers of the state. She demonstrated great
foresight in diplomacy, patience in the face of adversity, human tenderness
in her relations with other women, and an uncanny ability to read the signs
of divination. Her biography is contained in the later Biographies of Arrayed
Women as an exemplary mother; she was this, and much more.
Although Wi (not to be confused with the Warring States state of Wei,
which was one of the three successor states of Jin) was one of the oldest
states of the Zhou dynasty, rst established shortly after the Zhou conquest
of Shang and occupying what was then the strategic site of the former Shang
capital, by the Springs and Autumns period it had ceased to have any
inuence on the inter-state stage. Surrounded by larger states, its survival
depended on constantly changing alliances with those states. For instance,
Lord Ding relied on the support of his wifes state of Qi, to its northeast, to
fend o the growing power of Jin to its west. Wi had been administered
hereditarily by members of the Sun (Grandson) lineage of the ducal family,
descendants of Duke Wu of Wi (r. –), the longest reigning and
greatest ruler of the state and the last one to have had real power. At the time
of Lord Ding, the chief minister was Sun Linfu, better known by his
posthumous name of Sun Wenzi. Sun Wenzi had the reputation of being
arrogant and dicult, and was despised by Lord Ding, who forced him to
ee into exile—in the state of Jin, which at that time was recognized as the
premier of the states. It was just before Lord Dings own death that his wife,
Ding Jiang, rst appears in the historical record, setting the tone for all of her
subsequent activities.

Biographies

In , during a diplomatic visit of Lord Ding to Jin, Duke Li of Jin
(r. –) attempted a reconciliation between Lord Ding and Sun Wenzi.
Lord Ding refused to see him. After Lord Ding returned to Wi, Duke Li of
Jin again requested that Sun Wenzi be allowed to return to his home state.
Lord Ding remained adamant that he would not receive him, but Ding Jiang
interceded on behalf of Sun Wenzi, arguing that he was from an important
family in the state and also had the support of an important patron in Jin,
without which the state would surely perish. She concluded her remarks
with wise advice to the lord: Even though you hate him, wouldnt having
him be better than losing the state. Milord should endure this. Isnt it
acceptable to bring peace to the people and to pardon a great minister of the
family line! Lord Ding accepted her advice, restoring Sun Wenzi to his
position of chief minister; he would go on capably to lead Wi through
tumultuous events over the next two decades. Lord Ding, on the other hand,
would die later in that same year.
Lord Ding and Ding Jiangs only son died before his father did. A story
about his widow, and thus Ding Jiangs daughter-in-law, portrays Ding Jiang
as accompanying her to the border of the state as she returned to her natal
home. A later tradition says that Ding Jiang composed one of the poems
included in the Classic of Poetry upon this occasion: The Swallows. Its rst
stanza reads as follows:

Swallows, swallows going in ight, Up and then down apping their
wings.
Here is a girl who is returning, I go with her far in the wilds.
Gazing until I cant see her; Tears stream down as if its raining.

This is regarded as an indication of Ding Jiangs human kindness, but would
also suggest her literary talents—at least as understood in the eyes of later
people.
Since this son and widow were childless, when Lord Ding died, he was
succeeded by a son of a secondary consort; this was Lord Xian of Wi (r.
–, –). As his dates of reign suggest, Lord Xians reign was not
smooth, a future that Ding Jiang is said to have predicted based on his failure
properly to mourn his just deceased father: As for this guy, not only will he
bring the state of Wi to ruin, but it will surely begin with this widow. Alas,
heaven has sent down misfortune upon Wi! In fact, Lord Xian proved to be
tyrannical in his rule of the state and contemptuous of Ding Jiang, who at
least in terms of ritual ranked as his mother. After eighteen years in power,


Ding Jiang

he was overthrown in a coup, and forced into exile. On his way out of the
state, he commanded the chief priest to report his departure in the ancestral
temple, and to state that he was without guilt. Ding Jiang refused to allow
this, noting that he had mistreated the ancestors, the great ministers, and
herself. She instructed the priest to report his departure, but not that he was
without guilt, showing her resolute nature.
The last episode in the Zuo Tradition in which Ding Jiang is mentioned
occurs in the year when the small states Wei, Song and Zheng were
caught up in a back-and-forth contest between the great powers Chu and
Jin. At the time, Wei was allied with Jin, while Zheng was allied with Chu.
When Chu invaded Song, Wi came to its aid, causing the Zheng minister
Huanger to attack Wi in turn. Uncertain about how to respond to this
attack, and whether to counter-attack, Sun Wenzi, the chief minister of Wi,
had a turtle-shell divination performed. Apparently neither he nor the
diviners were able to understand the auspices of the crack that appeared in
the shell, which was in the shape of a mountain peak. Thus, he turned to
Ding Jiang for her interpretation. She interpreted the crack to mean that a
counter-attack would be successful, as indeed it turned out to be.

Sun Wenzi divined by turtle-shell about pursuing them. He presented
the crack to Ding Jiang. Madame Jiang asked about the oracle. He said:
The crack is like a mountain peak:
Theres a man going on campaign,
And yet loses his leader.
Madame Jiang said: That the campaigner loses his leader is the benet
of driving o bandits; the great minister should plan on it. The men
of Wi pursued them, and Sun Peng captured Huanger of Zheng at
Quanqiu.

Her ability to interpret the divination crack is meant to suggest, of course,
that Ding Jiang had special mantic abilities. But more than this, that a chief
counselor such as Sun Wenzi would turn to her to decide the course of a
military campaign demonstrates the great prestige Ding Jiang had earned in
her adopted state of Wi. Throughout her life, she had shown herself to be a
person of discernment, compassion, resolution, and intelligence, one of the
great women of the age.