CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF XI

Xi, the name meaning Happy, was born at Cockcrow on the day jiawu of the
twelfth month of the forty-fth year of King Zhao of Qin (r. –; i.e.,
) at Anlu, in present-day Hubei province. This was originally part of the
former state of Chu, but sixteen years earlier had been conquered by Qin; it
was now the new South Commandery of Qin. In the rst year of King Zheng
of Qin (r. /–), at the age of sixteen he began his schooling. Two
years later, he was drafted into the secretarial corps, and began a rapid climb
up the ranks. In , he became the Secretary of Anlu, where he was born, and
then two years later became Commandant Secretary, and then the following
year Commandant Secretary of the larger area of Yan. In the twelfth year of
King Zheng, , he was promoted to govern lawsuits there, apparently
acting as a judicial magistrate. In , he joined the army, and in was
assigned to the Pingyang Army, just in advance of the many campaigns that
Qin would undertake over the next decade to conquer all of the still
independent states and to bring about the unication of the empire, which Xi
certainly lived to see. It would seem that he died in , at the age of .
This degree of specicity about the details of someones life in antiquity is
very rare, especially one who passed his life more or less anonymously and who
was never mentioned in any of Chinas later historical records. This biography is
only possible because Xis tomb was unearthed in 1975 at a place called Shuihudi,
at Yunmeng, Hubei. In the tomb was found a great cache of documents written
on bamboo strips, including an annalistic history of Qin named by the
archaeologists who discovered the tomb as Annalistic Record. This history begins
with the rst year of the reign of King Zhao of Qin () and extends through
the thirtieth year of the current king (i.e., the First Emperor of Qin; ). Most
of it consists of great events in the life of the state of Qin, especially military
campaigns. Thus, it is recorded that in the twenty-eighth year of King Zhao, ,
Qin attacked, and presumably conquered Yan, the city that Xi would eventually
administer, and then attacked Anlu the following year. These attacks took place
before Xi was born, so it is clear that he inherited this portion of the annals.

Biographies

Even after Xi became the Commandant Secretary in Yan, most of the records
continue to concern events of state. For instance, the last year for which there is
a record, , records simply that The Current (King) passed through Anlu.
However, beginning with the record of Xis birth in , there are also notes,
written in a dierent hand, concerning his personal life. In , someone named
Gan was born; it is likely that this was Xis younger brother. In , his father was
drafted into the Qin army, but he must have been at home sometime thereafter,
for in someone named Su was born; it is possible that this was a younger
sister. Sometime later, in , there is the record of another birth, a child named
Hu; it is likely that this was Xis own son. In , his father died, followed by his
mother in . Finally, in , just at the hour of breakfast, Chuan Er (Pierced
Ears) was born; this must have been a second child, born to Xi rather late in his
life. Needless to say, biographical details such as these are unprecedented for
anyone from ancient China. We know that the Grand Councillor of Qin Li Si
(c. –), the most famous man of the time other than the First Emperor
himself, had at least one son, but we know this only because there is a record that
the son was executed the year before his father was.
Xis tomb was relatively small, with just a single con, though it was well
supplied with ritual implements, including some seventy bronze, lacquer,
and pottery vessels. But for historians the most important grave goods were
the , bamboo strips found inside the con. Although bamboo and silk
manuscripts from the Han dynasty had been found before this, this was the
rst discovery from prior to the time of the Qin burning of the books
(), so it goes without saying that it excited great interest. What is more,
there were ten dierent texts in the tomb. In addition to the Annalistic
Record, there were ve dierent manuscripts dealing with various topics of
the law, which was tting for Xi in his role as a judicial magistrate. Another
document, given the title Spoken Scripture is dated to ; it is the text of an
address made by the governor of South Commandery, a man named Teng,
to the administrators of all of the counties and marches within the
commandery. Although at this time, South Commandery had already been
under the control of Qin for over fty years, the native inhabitants still
identied with their former state of Chu and were not yet fully pacied.
According to the Annalistic Record, just in the preceding year, , there was
unrest in the area, and it is this unrest that Governor Teng warned the local
administrators to be on guard against. His address begins:

Of old, the people all have their local customs, and what they regard as
protable and what they love and hate are all dierent; this is


Xi

inconvenient for the people and harmful to the country. For this
reason, our sainted king has promulgated the laws in order to settle
the peoples hearts, to dispel their perversions, and to get rid of their
evil customs. When the laws and regulations are insucient, the
people are often sly and crafty, and that is why the edicts have been
issued. In general, the laws and edicts are for the purpose of educating
the people, to dispel their perversions, to get rid of their evil customs,
and to cause them to act in the right way.

Another document is called How to Be an Ocial, the contents of which are
well described by the title. It would seem that it is a text that circulated widely
throughout the Qin empire, other copies having since been unearthed from
other tombs. Another type of manuscript found in the tomb has also been found
widely throughout ancient Chinese tombs: these texts are known as daybooks.
They are a sort of almanac indicating what days are propitious for undertaking
various activities. There were two such daybooks in the tomb of Xi, and they are
still the most complete examples of this most popular of ancient texts.
Far and away the most numerous texts in the tomb are the legal texts,
which the editors divide into ve dierent types of texts. The rst includes
eighteen dierent statutes of the Qin state (each with multiple codicils):
Fields, Stables and Parks, Granaries, Metal and Cloth (i.e., Money), Passes
and Markets, Labor, Laborers, Equality of Labor, Statutory Labor, Supervisor
of Labor, Appointment of Ocials, Checking, Military Ranks, Food Rations,
Forwarding of Documents, Ministry of Finance, Commandants, and
Dependent States. These eighteen statutes certainly do not represent the
entirety of the statutory code of the Qin state, but they do give some sense of
just how detailed that code must have been. Each codicil is exceptionally
detailed, and will be familiar to anyone who has ever worked in a government
oce or for a large company. This is followed by a separate text devoted to
Checking, which essentially refers to Inventory Control. This text begins:

Concerning checking of general oces and prefectures: in case of a
surplus or shortage, the value of the goods is to be determined and the
responsible parties responsible for that of highest value, but not for the
sum total. The oce manager and those working there jointly repay
shortages; surpluses are recorded.

The text then continues to describe in great detail every contingency that
might occur in taking the inventory of an oce, the responsibilities of

Biographies

dierent workers, and the punishment for any infractions. There is also a
text called by the editors Miscellaneous Excerpts from Qin Statutes, primarily
concerned with personnel matters, many of which quote from numerous
other named statutes (which, however, are not included in their entirety).
These three texts all concern the general administration of a prefecture, such
as the Anlu prefecture of which Xi was magistrate.
The magistrate was responsible not only for the general administration of
the prefecture, but was also the chief legal ocer. Xis tomb also included two
other manuscripts that concerned this aspect of his work. The rst of these
is a very lengthy text, containing articles, called by the editors Answers to
Questions about Laws and Statutes, while the second text is entitled Models
for Sealing and Investigating; as the title indicates, it describes cases that
required investigation, some of which read like early detective novels.
These manuscripts are too lengthy to describe in any detail here, but just
the following examples of questions and answers included in Answers to
Questions about Laws and Statutes will give some indication as to just how
complex the job of a magistrate was under the Qin government.

A bandit enters the house of A and mortally wounds him. A calls out
Bandits, but his neighbors and the village chief and elders are absent
and do not hear him. Question: Should they be sentenced or not? If
investigation shows that the neighbors were absent, they are not to be
sentenced. However, the village chief and elders are to be sentenced
even if they were absent.
A marries a woman who had been married to another man but left
him, unbeknownst to A. They have children. She is caught. Question:
Where do the children go, given back (to the womans rst husband)
or conscated by the government? Conscation by the government is
an exceptional matter.
When children of the same mother but dierent fathers have sex
with each other, how are they to be sentenced? Beheading.

There is no way to know how many such cases Xi encountered in his work as
magistrate of Anlu prefecture. However, that he took these texts to the grave
with him, placed beside him inside his con, suggests that the information
in them was an important part of his own self-identication. It is an
identication that helps to put a human face on the complex bureaucracy of
the Qin state.