CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF WU ZIXU

Wu Yun, better known as Wu Zixu (–), was born to a prominent
family in the state of Chu. His biography, many details of which are recorded
in the Zuo Tradition and in Sunzis Art of War, and which were then
elaborated in Records of the Historian, with its stories of rise and fall, loyalty
and treachery, has been a favorite topic in later Chinese moral tales, making
him one of the best known and most loved gures from ancient China. Still
to this day, he is regarded as a sort of god throughout much of southern and
eastern China.
Both Wu Zixus grandfather Wu Ju and his father Wu She were important
advisers to kings of Chu, Wu She being the Grand Tutor to the son of King
Ping (r. –), named Jian. In , King Ping dispatched Wu Shes
assistant Fei Wuji to Qin to procure a wife for the crown prince Jian. However,
the woman that Fei Wuji brought back was so beautiful that he encouraged
the king to take her as his own consort, which the king did in fact do. Fei
Wuji then initiated a long campaign of intrigue against both the crown
prince and his own superior Wu She, who remained loyal to the prince.
Before long, Crown Prince Jian went into exile in states to the north of Chu,
though Wu She remained in the capital and remonstrated against the kings
treachery. On the advice of Fei Wuji, the king had Wu She arrested and
condemned to death unless his two sons, Wu Shang and Wu Zixu, would
come to the capital and be executed in his place. The elder son Wu Shang,
who was noted for his lial piety, agreed to go to the capital, but Wu Zixu,
who his father described as a cold-hearted realist, realized that the king
would kill all three of them in any event, and so followed Crown Prince Jian
into exile. When the elder brother Wu Shang arrived in the Chu capital, King
Ping did in fact kill him, as well as his father, Wu She. Wu Zixu swore to do
everything in his power to avenge their deaths.
While in exile in the north, Crown Prince Jian began to engage in his own
intrigues. Although he had been granted exile in the state of Zheng and was
well treated there, he plotted with the state of Jin to invade Zheng so that he

Biographies

might be rewarded with the rule of a local territory. When Duke Ding of
Zheng (r. –) and his wise minister Zi Chan (d. ) discovered this
plot, they had Jian executed. Recognizing that he too would be implicated in
the plot, Wu Zixu left Zheng in the dead of night, headed for the far southern
state of Wu. Up until this time, Wu, located at present-day Suzhou in Jiangsu
province on the periphery of what could then be considered the Chinese
world, had been a relatively unimportant player in the politics of the Springs
and Autumns period. From the time that he arrived there, Wu Zixu became
intimately involved in the internal politics of the state, befriending the Wu
prince Guang, a son of the former King Yumei (r. –) and nephew of
the present king, King Liao (r. –). The politics would soon involve
other states as well, including once again the state of Chu.
In , King Ping of Chu died and was succeeded by a son by his consort
from Qin. This son, who would be known as King Zhao (r. –), could
not have been more than six or seven years old at the time. Wu Zixu
encouraged King Liao of Wu to take advantage of the succession in Chu to
launch a surprise attack, though it is said that Wu Zixu knew that this attack
would not succeed, hoping thereby to remove King Liao from power. When
the attack in fact failed, King Liaos nephew, Guang, turned on the king and
assassinated him. Guang then became king in turn, known as King Hel
(r. –), another of the most celebrated gures of the time. Hel made
Wu Zixu his principal political adviser, while the commander-in-chief of the
Wu army was none other than Sun Wu (–), better known as Sunzi,
the author of the famous Art of War.
From the time that he took power, Hel determined to conquer the
neighboring states, Chu to the northwest and Yue to the southeast. At rst,
Wu Zixu and Sunzi both advised caution, that the time was still not ripe to
act. Finally, in , allying with the states of Dang and Cai, Wu attacked Chu,
and over the course of several battles nally entered the Chu capital Ying.
Wu Zixu, accompanying the army, sought for King Zhao of Chu, but he had
already ed north to the state of Sui, a long-time ally of Chu now better
known in the archaeological record as Zeng. Not nding the king, Wu Zixu
dug up the grave of the former King Ping, who had executed his father and
elder brother, and whipped the corpse three hundred times. King Hel for
his part attempted to rape the queen mother; when she fought him o with
a knife, he left the Chu capital in some shame. This was but the beginning of
the tables turning for Hel.
Leaving the capital, Hel and the Wu army went in pursuit of King Zhao,
besieging Zeng and demanding that it turn over the Chu king. When the


Wu Zixu

ruler of Sui refused to do so, the people of the state divined about the matter;
when the result was not auspicious, they held out and continued to give
refuge to King Zhao. Meanwhile, Chu emissaries had reached the state of
Qin requesting that it come to Chus rescue. Qin, infuriated by news that
King Hel had attempted to rape the queen mother of King Zhao, who was
originally from Qin, sent an army of ve hundred chariots to defeat the Wu
army in the eld. At the same time, the state of Yue, Wus neighbor to the
south, took advantage of the Wu army being away from home to attack Wu
itself. Now defeated in Chu and with disorder at home in Wu, Hel had no
option but to return home.
In , taking advantage of the death of King Yunchang of Yue (r. –
), who had ruled that southern neighbor of Wu for forty years, King Hel
led the Wu army to attack Yue. However, King Hel was mortally wounded
in the battle. He was succeeded by King Fuchai (r. –), who in the
second year of his reign once again attacked Yue, this time taking its King
Goujian (r. –) prisoner. Although Wu Zixu urged King Fuchai to kill
Goujian, saying that he was capable of enduring much hardship and if
allowed to live would eventually bring harm to Wu, King Fuchai did not
listen. Instead, he allowed Goujian to live as his servant. Goujian served
Fuchai well, and gained his trust, so much so that after three years he was
allowed to return to Yue to be king again there.
Despite King Fuchais trust in King Goujian, Wu Zixu continued to
remonstrate, saying that Wus relationship with Yue was like having an illness
inside the body of the state. This advice too went unheeded. Instead, King
Fuchai turned his attention to the north, to the state of Qi, which he hoped
to conquer as well. He sent Wu Zixu there as his ambassador, hoping to gain
intelligence about that distant state. After carrying out his embassy and
before returning to Wu, Wu Zixu left his own son in Qi, telling him that there
was no future for him in Wu. Upon returning to Wu, Wu Zixu once again
found himself the victim of slander at court. King Fuchai was intent upon
attacking Qi, which Wu Zixu advised against, still fearing that Wus real
enemy lay in its rear at Yue. But this advice was dismissed as self-serving.
Even Wu Zixus having left his son at Qi was regarded with suspicion. With
that, King Fuchai presented him with a sword and instructed him to commit
suicide. Although Wu Zixu protested his innocence and his service to the
state, he obeyed the command. However, before doing so, he instructed his
own retainers to cut out his eyes and post them on the gate of the city so that
he would be able to see the Yue army when it came to invade Wu. With that,
he did cut his throat.

Biographies

That year, King Fuchai did in fact successfully attack Qi. Now the
preeminent power in both southern and northern China, two years later
Fuchai summoned the rulers of the northern states to an inter-state
conference at Yellow Pool (Huangchi), in present-day Fengqiu county,
Henan, where he competed with Jin to be named Premier of all the states.
Although he was successful in this as well, his success was of very brief
duration. Taking advantage of Fuchais absence, King Goujian of Yue invaded
Wu and killed its crown prince. Nine years later, he again attacked, this time
when Fuchai was present in the state. Fuchai was forced to commit suicide
in his own turn, and his state of Wu was brought to an end.
Thus did the eyes of Wu Zixu see his own vindication.