CHAPTER
ESSAY ON WARFARE

Beginning in the late Neolithic period, roughly at the time that Yao and Shun
were supposed to be ruling China (i.e., the century or two on either side of
2000 BCE), substantial walls began to be erected around settlements all
across north China. These were dierent from the low barriers that mark
earlier Neolithic settlements, which apparently were intended to protect the
settlements from wild animals; these walls were obviously intended to
defend against attacks by other human beings. This is the rst evidence,
indirect though it is, of widespread warfare in ancient China.
It is only when we move forward to the historical age—the late Shang
dynasty—that we have more direct evidence of warfare. There is a great deal
of it, both artifactual and inscriptional. The artifactual evidence includes tens
of thousands of weapons of various types. The most eye-catching, about
which much more will be said below, are horse-drawn chariots that have
been found buried near the royal tombs at Anyang. However, far and away
the most common weapon is called a dagger-axe (ge), a pointed slashing
weapon mounted at the end of a long wooden haft. Supercially like a spear,
the dagger-axe was wielded in a very dierent—and more ecient—manner;
it was the standard-issue weapon for both foot-soldiers and also one of the
three combatants who rode in chariots. One other combatant in the chariots
was equipped with a reex bow, and there is considerable archaeological
evidence of bows and especially arrows—in the form of bronze and stone
arrowheads (the bows themselves have not survived well in archaeological
contexts). However, while bows and arrows were certainly used as long-range
projectile weapons (at least one skeleton found in a Shang burial of ritual
victims had a bronze arrowhead embedded in his leg), the more common
long-range weapon was probably a sort of sling; although none of these have
been found, round balls that would have been launched from them have
been found at archaeological sites all over north China. The Biblical story of
David and Goliath suces to show the lethal nature of such slung projectiles.

Essays

The inscriptional evidence complements the artifactual evidence. The
Shang kings, and especially King Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189), divined about
nearly every aspect of life, including of course warfare, both oensive and
defensive. One of the most famous oracle-bone inscriptions of all, rst
published in 1914, just a decade after the rst notice of these oracle bones, and
subsequently illustrated in almost every account of them, concerns an attack
on the Shang by two western enemies called the Earth Land and Spade Land.

Crack-making on guisi (day ), Que armed: In the next ten-day
week there will be no harm. The king prognosticated and said: There
is a curse. It is expected that there will be hardship coming. Reaching
the fth day dingyou (day ), there really did come hardship from the
west. Zhi Guo reported saying: The Earth Land campaigned in our
eastern suburbs, conquering two cities. The Spade Land also invaded
our western suburbs and elds.

Hundreds of other divinations concern subsequent hostilities between
Shang and its allies and these two enemies and their allies. Among those
leading the Shang campaigns against them was Consort Hao (Fu Hao), one
of King Wu Dings wives, and the mother of one of his sons who would later
become king.

Crack-making on xinsi (day ), Zheng armed: If this spring the
king raises men and calls out to Consort Hao to attack the Earth Land,
we will receive aid in it.

The king too led some of the Shang attacks, though apparently not directly
against the Earth Land or the Spade Land, but rather against one of their
allies.

Crack-making on guichou (day ), Xuan armed: The king will ally
with Xi to attack Ba Land.

Most of the inscriptions record just the original divination, which is a
sort of a prayer, expressing the desire that the Shang would be successful,
and so do not usually indicate the result. Thus, it is hard to know many
details about the battles, even who won and who lost, not to mention
numbers of soldiers involved and the tactics used. One divination does
propose raising thirteen thousand troops, but this is probably anomalous, if


Warfare

it was even carried out. Some inscriptions bear verications, after the fact
accounts of what really did happen. Two record Shang losses, in one case ten
men, in another case fteen and sixteen men in two separate attacks. There
is some evidence that the war against the Earth Land and Spade Land was
protracted, continuing over the course of some ve years and extending
back and forth across what is today southern Shanxi province, just to the
west of the Taihang Mountains west of the Shang capital at Anyang, though
it is likely that the battles were intermittent. It is certainly unlikely that
armies were kept in the eld for long periods of time.
After the time of King Wu Ding, because of changes in the scope and
purpose of divination, warfare appears less often as a topic. This probably does
not mean that ghting itself was any less common. However, it may be the case
that the numbers of people involved in battle increased. A hundred or so years
after King Wu Dings war with the Earth Land and Spade Land, one of the
longest inscriptions of the entire period concerns another battle between Shang
and a coalition of enemies, probably also located to the west of the Shang
capital. Unfortunately, only about one-third of this piece survives, making it
very hard to read. Fortunately, however, the surviving portion is from the
verication. It is probably not surprising that it records a decisive Shang victory.

. . . Minor Vassal Qiang allied to attack, capturing Rou of Wei . . .
men, , of Er, + of Fan . . . horses, two chariots, ?, quivers
of arrows, . . . herewith making an oering to Da Yi, sacricing Yin, the
leader of Shen . . . Fan to Zu Yi, and sacricing Rou to Zu Ding. Ran
said: The capital bestows . . .

Some readers focus on the sacricial oering of the leaders of the enemy
states to dierent Shang ancestors. However, for the topic of warfare, the
number of captives would seem to be indicative of a larger scale to the battle
than was the case in the Earth Land war, and perhaps more important still is
the mention of capturing two chariots. While, as mentioned above, some
artifactual evidence of chariots has been unearthed at Anyang, this is the
only explicit mention of them being used in battle (as opposed to hunting)
in the Shang oracle-bone record.
The question of the chariot looms large over all discussions of ancient
Chinese warfare. The chariot is the largest and most sophisticated piece of
equipment of the age, requiring skilled carpentry and metallurgy, not to
mention the ability to train horses and to learn to drive and ght from a
moving vehicle. Chinese legends variously attribute the invention of the

Essays

chariot to the Yellow Emperor (Huang Di) or to Xi Zhong, a gure said to
have lived at the beginning of the Xia dynasty. Paradoxically, other legends
credit the domestication of the horse to Xiang Tu, said to have lived toward
the end of that dynasty. None of these legends has any basis in fact. It is now
clear that the chariot was imported into China from areas further west, in
the trans-Caucasus region of Central Asia, only at about the time of Shang
king Wu Ding. Indeed, prior to that time horses were also unknown in
China; the horse and chariot arrived as a unit.
Many scholars argue that the chariot was the decisive weapon of antiquity:
playing a role analogous to the tank in twentieth-century warfare. Other
scholars argue that it was too cumbersome to have contributed any tactical
advantage to an army, at best serving as an elevated and mobile command
platform. As we will see, there is justication for both of these viewpoints,
though they both see only part of the ancient battleeld.
In the inscription quoted just above, the form of which anticipates the
long inscriptions on some Western Zhou bronze vessels, the explicit record
of the capture of horses and chariots is very important for the history of the
chariot in China. It is noteworthy that these chariots were used by a
confederation of enemies located to the west of Shang. Perhaps more
important (though this would need to be qualied because of the fragmentary
nature of the inscription), despite the capture of several chieftains and over
fteen hundred men, that only two chariots were captured perhaps indicates
that chariotry had not yet become a prominent part of the military, whether
of the enemies or of the Shang. As a new invention—and an imported one at
that—the chariot doubtless required a considerable amount of time before
people learned to take full advantage of its potential. But ancient China
covers a long period of time, and the evidence is that during the Zhou
dynasty it became more and more important.
An argument can be made that it was chariots that allowed the Zhou to
overthrow the Shang in 1045. Certainly, one of the poems of the Classic of
Poetry, known as The Great Brightness, allots a prominent role to them at
the battle of Shepherds Wild (Muye).

The Shepherds Wild so vast, so vast, Sandalwood carts gleaming,
gleaming,
And teams of four pounding pounding. It was Major Exalted Uncle,
The one who raised up eagle-like. Cool was that Martial King,
Spreading out to attack great Shang, Meeting the morning clear and
bright.


Warfare

Of course, there is doubtless a great degree of poetic license in this
description. However, there is good evidence that by the end of the Western
Zhou, c. , armies were using many more than just two chariots in battle.
One of the best pieces of evidence comes in the inscription on a bronze
vessel, the Duo You ding, made to celebrate a Zhou victory in battle over the
Xianyun, a western enemy. The inscription is almost cinematic in its retelling
of several battles the two sides fought and their aftermath.

It was the tenth month; because the Xianyun had just arisen and
broadly attacked the Jing Garrison, (which) reported back to the king,
who commanded the Martial Duke: Dispatch your premier men to
advance and pursue at Jing Garrison.
The Martial Duke commanded Duo You to lead the dukes chariotry
to advance and pursue at Jing Garrison. On guiwei (day ), the
enemies attacked Xun, taking captives. Duo You westwardly pursued.
On jiashen (day ) morning, striking at Mai, Duo You again cut o
heads and manacled prisoners; in all, using the dukes chariotry to cut
o the heads of two hundred and . . . ve men, manacling twenty-three
prisoners, capturing teams of the enemys chariotry, and taking
back the captives of the men of Xun. And then striking at Gong, (he)
cut o the heads of thirty-six men, manacled two prisoners and
captured ten teams of chariotry. Following the vanguard, (he) pursued
and struck at Shi. Duo You again cut o heads and manacled prisoners.
Then (he) raced in pursuit as far as Yangzhong; the dukes chariotry
cut o the heads of men and manacled three prisoners. It was only
that the captured chariots could not be taken and so were burned, with
only the horses driving the wounded and returning the recovered Jing
Garrison captives.
Duo You then presented the captives, scalps and prisoners to the
duke. The Martial Duke then presented (them) to the king, who
addressed the Martial Duke saying: You have pacied the Jing
Garrison; I bless you, awarding you lands and elds. On dingyou (day
), the Martial Duke was at the Presentation Palace and commanded
Xiangfu to summon Duo You, (who) then entered the Presentation
Palace. The duke personally addressed Duo You saying: I initiated the
business, (but) you were victorious and unawed, and have completed
the business, with much booty. You have pacied the Jing Garrison; (I)
award you one jade-handled ladle, one set of bells, and one hundred
catties of nest bronze.

Essays

Duo You dares to respond to the dukes benecence, herewith
making this oertory caldron with which to befriend and to assist
him; may sons sons and grandsons eternally treasure and use it.

The combined Xianyun casualties recorded for the three battles described
here are + killed, captured, and + chariots captured. It would be
tempting to see in the almost exact : ratio of chariots captured to men
killed to think that the Xianyun chariots were manned by three soldiers, as
we know the Zhou chariots were. This may well be true. However, the record
after the last battle that the chariots could not be taken and were burned
suggests that the total number of chariots captured was even greater than
. What is more, this inscription suggests only that the Zhou managed to
drive o the Xianyun, not that they annihilated the entire force; many other
chariots must have gotten away. And we can expect that the Zhou employed
an even greater number of chariots. This would seem to have been two
chariot armies facing o against each other.
The subsequent Springs and Autumns period was surely the high tide of
chariot warfare, when even the small state of Zhu, a state of no particular
signicance, is said to have had chariots in its army. To take just the
pivotal battle of Chengpu in , when the state of Jin and its northern allies
turned back a confederation of states led by Chu in a battle that is often seen
as having saved northern China from southern domination, records of the
battle in the Zuo Tradition say that the Jin army included chariots. We
can imagine that the opposing Chu army had a similar number. Among the
Jin allies, the states of Qi and Song are elsewhere said to have put and
chariots into other battles, and the Chu allies Lu and Wei employed
, and respectively. Even if we suppose that many of these numbers
are exaggerated, still a conservative estimate for the armies of the ten
dierent states engaging in this momentous battle would put the number of
chariots on the battleeld at between , and ,. A modern Chinese
military historian has estimated that a chariot occupied square meters
standing still. If we assume just half of this conservative estimate for the
number of chariots, they would have required forty square kilometers just to
deploy, not to mention the amount of space that would have been taken up
in their charges against each other.
While chariot warfare continued to be the norm for the remainder of the
Springs and Autumns period, two innovations that occurred in China
toward the end of the period would render chariots all but obsolete. In some
ways, these two innovations worked at cross-purposes, but in both cases


Warfare

they fundamentally transformed warfare. The rst led to the rise of the
infantry as the most important component of all armies. The second led to a
wholly new component of armies: cavalry.
The earlier of the two innovations was the mechanical crossbow. Whereas
the hallowed reex bow, which had been a staple weapon of Chinese armies
since at least the Shang dynasty, was a powerful weapon, able to pierce a
defenders leather armor at a distance of meters, it required considerable
skill both to produce and to use. Indeed, archery was one of the six skills that
a nobleman was supposed to master, and there were elaborate rituals
involving archery contests. On the other hand, the mechanical crossbow
could be mass produced and anyone who could aim and pull a trigger could
surpass even the best of the old-fashioned archers. The crossbow pellets
could reach the riders on chariots well before they came within their own
striking distance, greatly diminishing the threat of that foremost of earlier
weapons.
With foot-soldiers now armed with greater killing power than the old
chariot forces, armies in the subsequent Warring States period grew larger
and larger. This rise in the infantry was only partly driven by the introduction
of the crossbow. Doubtless much more important was a rise in the population
of the time, itself driven by the introduction of iron plows that produced a
great increase in agricultural production. By the end of the period, armies
would reach into the hundreds of thousands of soldiers, sometime remaining
in the eld for months at a time. This in turn entailed an important change
in the leadership of the armies. Professional soldiers are well aware that wars
are won or lost by successful management of logistics. Soldiers that are
hungry or sick do not ght.
In China, this gave rise to professional generals, including those who at
least purportedly wrote manuals of warfare. The most famous of these was
Sun Wu, better known as Sunzi (–), and his Art of War. According to
Sunzi because warfare at this time required the mobilization of all the
resources of a state, it should only be undertaken after thorough consideration
and planning. He states regularly that the best warfare is that which never
takes place, the best victory that which takes over the opponents state intact.

In general, the method for using warfare is that preserving the enemys
state intact is best, destroying it comes next.

But when the army was nally put into the eld, it was the generals
responsibility to choose the proper battleeld, one that would give his own

Essays

army the advantage and put the enemy army at a disadvantage. For Sunzi,
the art of war was entirely a matter of strategy; tactics were a much less
important consideration.
The second great innovation in warfare at the time, not reected in Sunzis
Art of War, was cavalry. By the beginning of the fth century, mounted
warriors already appeared on the periphery of China, and by the late fourth
century, Chinese armies also adopted this form of ghting. While this spelled
the denitive death knell for chariots, which devolved once again into the
elite command platforms that they evidently had been during the Shang
dynasty, cavalry never assumed great importance in battles within China
proper. It was only along the Central Asian frontier that Chinese armies were
all but forced to ght cavalry with cavalry, a ght for which Chinese armies
were not well suited.
It is often said that in ancient China wars were fought to display the
chivalric behavior of the participants. People regularly cite as an example of
this chivalry an account in the Zuo Tradition for in which Duke Xiang
of Song (r. –) refused to engage the army of Chu in battle before it
had fully prepared.

In winter, in the eleventh month, on the rst day of the month jisi, the
Duke of Song and the Chu army did battle at the Hong River. The Song
army had already formed ranks, but the Chu army had not yet crossed
the river. The Song Supervisor of the Horse said, They are numerous
while we are few. Lets attack them while they have not yet completed
the crossing. The duke said, That is not proper. When the Chu army
had nished crossing but had not yet formed ranks, the Supervisor of
the Horse again reported it to him. The duke said, It is not yet proper.
Only after the Chu army had formed ranks did he attack them. The
Song troops were defeated in a rout, the duke was wounded in
the thigh, and the palace guards were slaughtered there. The people of
the capital all blamed the duke. The duke said, A gentleman does not
wound twice, nor does he take prisoners of those with graying hair.
When people of old engaged in warfare, they did not take advantage of
deles and ravines. Although I, the unworthy one, am but the remnant
of a lost state, I would not drum an attack against those who have not
formed their ranks.

It is doubtless the case that warfare became a bloodier exercise in the Warring
States period than it had been in the Springs and Autumns period, not to


Warfare

mention the Shang and Western Zhou before that. Nevertheless, even in
those earlier periods, archers shot metal-tipped arrows and foot-soldiers
fought for their lives. Duke Xiang may well have exhibited such chivalrous
behavior, but he was routinely derided for it by his own countrymen and he
was held up as an example of how not to ght. It was surely no exaggeration
when Sunzi, who might be called the rst professional soldier in China,
began his Art of War with the following statement:

Warfare is the great aair of state, the place of life and death, the way
of survival or annihilation. It is essential that it be examined.

Soldiers did indeed die. One of the poems of the Verses of Chu is called
Martyrs for the State. It is a tting conclusion to any treatment of warfare,
whether in ancient China or anywhere or anytime else.

Having taken up Wu halberds and strapped on rhinoceros armor,
The chariots scraped against each others axle-caps, and the short
weapons joined.
Their banners blotting out the sun, the enemy was like a cloud,
The arrows falling crisscross, the soldiers fought to the fore.
Having surmounted our lines, having broken through our ranks,
The left horse dead in the harness, the right slashed and wounded.
Spiking the chariot wheels and tethering the horses,
The jade mallets beat and the drums were sounded.
The seasons of heaven fell, and the awesome spirits were angry.
You were brutally wiped out, abandoned on the distant plain.
You set out not to come back; you went not to return,
The at plain abrupt and the road too distant.
With long swords on your belts and Qin bows under your arms,
Your bodies and heads may have been severed, but your hearts are
unimpeachable.
Truly were you brave, acting with martial valor,
To the end rm and strong, insurmountable.
Your bodies may have died, but your spirits are numinous,
Your souls have become the heroes of the ghosts.