CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF MENCIUS AND XUNZI

Meng Ke, better known as Mengzi or, in the Western world, as Mencius
(c. –), is now generally reputed to be the most inuential Confucian
philosopher after only Confucius himself. He was born in the small state of
Zou, in present-day Shandong province just south of Qufu where Confucius
was born. He is said to have been descended from the lords of the state of Lu,
the same country as Confucius. According to legends about him, Menciuss
father died when he was young and he was raised by his mother, who is
included in the Han-dynasty book Biographies of Arrayed Women as a
paragon of motherhood. It is said that she moved their house three times,
before nally relocating next to a school so that he could focus on his
education. His teacher—or at least the teacher of his teacher—is supposed to
have been Zi Si (–), the grandson of Confucius. Since no later than
the time of Xunzi (c. –), Zi Si and Mencius have been linked as one
dominant lineage of Confucian teaching.
The dates of both Menciuss birth and death are uncertain, and nothing
more is known of his life until the late 320s, when he presented himself at the
court of King Huicheng of Wei (r. –, –), at the Wei capital
Daliang, located near present-day Kaifeng, Henan. In the rst of the ve
conversations between the two men recorded in the book Mencius, King
Huicheng, nearly eighty years old himself at the time, refers to Mencius as
old man, a term of respect, and thanks him for coming a thousand li
(about ve hundred kilometers; in actuality, Zou is only about three hundred
kilometers from Kaifeng, but this exaggeration was also a sign of respect). It
is clear that King Huicheng had great respect for Mencius, but the king died
shortly after Menciuss arrival at his court, and so was not able to put any of
his policies into eect. King Huicheng died in , and was succeeded by his
son King Xiangai (r. –).
Unimpressed with this kings demeanor, Mencius moved to the northern
state of Qi, where he remained at the court of King Xuan of Qi (r. –)

Biographies

for at least six or seven years. King Xuan was famed for his patronage of
scholars from the various states, having established what is generally referred
to as the Jixia Academy to house them, and Mencius was clearly the senior-
most of these scholars. The relationship between the two men seems to have
frayed several years later in the aftermath of Qis attack on the neighboring
state of Yan. Some years earlier, King Kuai of Yan (r. –, d. ) had
abdicated in favor of his chief minister Zi Zhi, deposing also his own son, the
crown prince Ping. While philosophers of the time, including Mencius, had
advocated for such abdication, seeing it as a return to the Golden Age of Yao
and Shun, for the kings of the many states it posed an existential threat.
When crown prince Ping of Yan revolted, King Xuan took advantage of the
civil war in Yan to attack and annex the state, installing a puppet ruler.
Mencius seems initially to have agreed with this intervention, but when the
occupation turned disastrous, he became critical of King Xuan. With that, he
left the state. It is unclear where or how he lived out his nal years, or even
how many years he lived. It is also unclear whether it was he himself who
wrote the many conversations and thoughts contained in the book bearing
his name, or if it was later disciples. However, for the most part the book
preserves a consistent authorial perspective, even if the personality it reveals
is multifaceted: Mencius could at times be brilliant, at times self-serving and
self-righteous, and at times irritating (certainly so to those in power to
whom he spoke truth). He was certainly human.
Menciuss philosophy is contained primarily in the book Mencius. The
book is in seven chapters, each of which is divided into two parts. The rst
six chapters are mainly in the form of conversations with others, some of
whom were—as noted above—rulers of states, and some of whom were
other thinkers of his time. Mencius was probably most famous in his own
day—and thereafter as well—for his dictum that human nature is inherently
good. He argued this position with both logic and with parables. For instance,
he suggested that anyone who saw a baby about to fall into a well would rush
to save it. This response would be neither premeditated nor motivated by a
reward, but rather would be spontaneous. From this, he drew the conclusion
that All people have a heart that cannot bear the suering of others. He
extended this conclusion to argue too that all humans are equal, at least
morally, stating that all men can be a Yao or Shun.
This moral philosophy almost necessarily entailed a political and
economic philosophy. Mencius most emphatically did not argue that all men
have equal political rights; he was a staunch defender of the divine right of
kings to rule. However, he required that rulers deserve that right and


Mencius and Xunzi

continue to preserve it. Otherwise, Heaven would withdraw its mandate
from them, and the people would be within their rights to revolt. This is the
famous theory of the Mandate of Heaven, usually associated with the Duke
of Zhou at the beginning of the Western Zhou period; Mencius may have
been even more important than the Duke of Zhou in ensuring that this
theory would continue to inuence Chinese political thought throughout
the many dynasties that would follow the Zhou.
What he meant by deserving the divine right to rule was to be a true
king. In one of his conversations with King Huicheng of Wei, when the
king claimed that he was ashamed that his kingdom was much smaller than
that of Qin or Chu, Mencius responded:

With a territory just a hundred li square, one can be a king. If Milord
were to extend humane governance to the people, reducing
punishments and nes, keeping taxes light, and ploughing deeply and
weeding easily, then the able-bodied would have spare time to practice
lial piety and deference towards elders, loyalty and faithfulness.
At home, they would serve their parents and elder brothers, abroad
they would serve their elders and superiors, and with nothing more
than clubs they could beat the sturdy armor and sharp weapons of
Qin and Chu.

Mencius also espoused a consistent economic philosophy that is usually
characterized as a well-eld system. This derives from the Chinese character
for well: . This character, originally a pictograph of a well, was taken to
describe a nine-part division of a square plot of land, of which the eight
parts around the perimeter were to be given to individual families. The
families would jointly till the central square, the product of which would be
their joint tax burden. According to Mencius, this was the rule of King Wen
(r. 1099/1056–1050) even before the Zhou conquest of Shang. In addition to
this well-eld system, Mencius claimed that King Wen levied no taxes on
trade, did not restrict the people from hunting and shing, did not extend
punishments for crimes to the relatives of criminals, and took care of widows
and orphans and the elderly without children to care for them.
As simple as this political and economic theory sounds, in the context of
the realpolitik of the Warring States period Mencius did not persuade either
King Huicheng of Wei or King Xuan of Qi, or any of the other rulers of the
era, for that matter. Unfortunately, it has not been much more inuential in
other eras or in other states.

Biographies

Criticism of Mencius began in the generation or two after his life,
especially in the teaching of Xun Kuang, better known simply as Xunzi; he is
generally regarded as the second of the great Confucian philosophers of the
Warring States period after Mencius. Not much is known of his early life,
though there are stories that he was alive during the time of King Kuai of Yan
(i.e., ) on the one hand, and that he lived to see the united empire (i.e.,
) on the other. Neither is there much known of where he was from, other
than a tradition that he was born in the state of Zhao. By mid-life, there is
somewhat more detail. He is said to have been in Qi at the time of King
Xiang of Qi (r. –), where for some period of time he was the director
of the Jixia Academy, which attracted scholars from throughout the various
states. During his time there, he is supposed to have been the teacher of both
Han Feizi (c. –) and Li Si (–), two thinkers who were the great
proponents of Legalism and who made names for themselves in the state of
Qin. Xunzi too is said to have spent a number of years in Qin, of which he
had a positive opinion. Although there are, to be sure, Legalist tendencies in
his teaching, Xunzi always regarded himself as a disciple of Confucius. Late
in his life, he had the chance to put his teachings into practice, serving as the
magistrate of Lanling, a town in the southern part of modern-day Shandong
province. However, it is not clear how eective he was in this role. He lost the
post two years after being appointed to it, when his patron, the lord of
Chunshen (d. ), the prime minister of Chu, was assassinated. Xunzi
apparently remained in Lanling for the remainder of his lengthy life, though
almost nothing further is known about those years.
The thought of Xunzi is known from the book bearing his name: Xunzi.
It is a very substantial book of thirty-two chapters, most of which were
probably written by Xunzi himself. Whereas earlier philosophical texts in
China are often written in a disjointed manner, often making use of
questions-and-answers or parables, the Xunzi is largely composed of essays
that present a philosophical argument complete with a thesis, full supporting
evidence, and a conclusion. Whereas Mencius had famously argued that
human nature is inherently good, Xunzi argued the opposite: that human
nature is evil. However, while these two positions seem to be diametrically
opposed, in fact the two thinkers agreed that human nature is perfectible,
and that education and ritual are the keys to this. Xunzi viewed ritual, which
ought to be thought of broadly as correct behavior, rather than in the narrow
sense of solely religious acts, as having been established by the sage kings of
antiquity as a means of teaching the people to be good. He used the analogy
of carpenters using steam to straighten warped lumber to illustrate the eect


Mencius and Xunzi

that ritual had on human behavior: left in their natural state, people would
invariably behave badly; however, once straightened, they would remain on
the straight and narrow thereafter, and would not revert to their original
warped ways.
Xunzi conceived of education as the means of inculcating the ancient
rituals. Indeed, the rst chapter of the Xunzi is entitled Encouraging Study.
According to this chapter, it was the responsibility of scholars such as
himself—followers of Confucius—to be the teachers. These scholars were to
be broadly trained in the classics, especially the Poetry and Scriptures, and
indeed many of the leading scholars of these texts during the subsequent
Han dynasty traced their learning back to the teaching of Xunzi. He took a
dim view of the utilitarian teachings designed for farmers, merchants or
artisans, and he was especially critical of the many theories regarding the art
of war, such as those by Sunzi (–) and Wu Qi (–). In the
chapter of the Xunzi devoted to war, Xunzi argued that success in warfare
depends not on generals or military strategies, but rather on the ruler gaining
the trust of his people through virtuous rule.
Xunzi argued that what sets humans apart from other forms of life is our
sense of morality, which allows us to join together in social groups. A safe and
stable society would be all the reward that people should expect. Xunzi
emphatically denied any supernatural agency to heaven or to the gods, saying
the Way is not the way of heaven and is not way of earth, but is the way of
directing people. Heaven—by which we should probably understand the
natural world—is constant, and does not change depending on the actions of
mankind. Xunzi noted that good humans often die young, while people who
behave badly sometimes live to an old age, or that the good are as likely to be
poor and the evil rich. In line with this, Xunzi criticized the widespread belief
of the time that one could see future events in the signs of nature, such as
eclipses and extreme weather conditions. Droughts or oods can aect states
ruled by good rulers just as well as those ruled by evil rulers; the dierence is
that good rulers devote themselves to the tasks of government, setting aside
rainy-day stores in anticipation of droughts to come, and strengthening dikes
before the inevitable rains come causing the rivers to rise. Evil rulers, on the
other hand, concern themselves with such destructive tools as weaponry or,
worse still, with their own enrichment.
There is much more in the Xunzi that would be—and has been—of
interest to philosophers and statesmen alike that cannot be explored in a
brief biography such as this. Xunzi was surely shaped by the events of his
day, but his teachings often seem to speak to the modern condition.