CHAPTER
ESSAY ON LAW

As is often the case for ancient China, the earliest evidence of law—or at least
of the administration of punishments—is seen in the oracle-bone
inscriptions of the Shang dynasty. There is evidence of four of what would
come to be a series of ve mutilating punishments. In all four cases, the
punishment is portrayed in the pictograph corresponding to the word for
the punishment. Only in the last case is the oracle-bone form of the graph
directly antecedent to the present-word, and even in that case the word now
has a dierent meaning.
to cut o the nose, the character combining a nose and a knife,
corresponding to the modern character yi
to amputate the leg, the character combining a frontal view of a
person with one foot missing and a hand holding a saw,
corresponding to the modern character yue
to castrate, the character combining a penis and a knife,
corresponding to the modern character zhuo
to decapitate, the character combining the blade of a dagger-axe
going through a mans neck, corresponding to the modern
character fa to attack
The fth of the mutilating punishments, the lightest of the ve, was tattooing
the face, the character for which is seen in later Zhou-dynasty bronze

inscriptions: (corresponding to the modern character mo ink; inky),
the mark on the face clearly visible, as it would have been on the person so
marked for life as a criminal.
As is also often the case, it is during the Western Zhou period that we
encounter the earliest expressions of what would later become fundamental
principles of Chinese civilization. Notions of law are no exception. Most
histories of Chinese law begin with the Pronouncement to Kang chapter of

Essays

the Exalted Scriptures. It purports to be an announcement to Kangshu Feng,
the youngest main-line son of King Wen of Zhou (r. 1099/1056–1050), when
he was appointed to oversee the former capital territory of the Shang dynasty,
just a few years after the Zhou conquest of the Shang. Chinese historians
debate whether the king who made the address was King Wu (r. 1049/1045–
1043) or the Duke of Zhou (d. c. 1030) speaking on behalf of the young King
Cheng (r. 1042/1035–1006), but it is likely that the address took place after
the deaths of those two founding fathers, and certainly after the Zhou
suppressed the Shang peoples rebellion against Zhou rule.
There are several fundamental principles that Feng is told to uphold.
First, given that he is overseeing the people of the former Shang capital, he is
told to consider the laws of the former dynasty, and to follow them when
they are proper. More important, he is to consider whether crimes are
committed intentionally or by accident, and to adjust the punishment
accordingly. A small crime, if committed intentionally, was to be punished
harshly, but even a great crime, if committed accidentally, was to be treated
leniently. Of even more interest, crimes within a family were also within the
purview of the ruler: a son who transgressed against the dictates of lial
piety or a father who did not treat his son properly were seen as throwing
into disorder the righteousness of Heaven; they were beyond pardon. In a
similar vein, teachers and government ocials were to be held to an
especially high standard. The king says that he detests any action that
corrupts the young or takes advantage of the common people.
The document is too lengthy to quote in its entirety. The portion
concerning the law as we might understand it reads as follows:

The king said: Wuhu! Feng, respectfully understand your punishments.
When men have small crimes that are not accidental, but carried to the
end, intentionally acting contrary to the statutes, even though their crimes
be small, you must put them to death. But in the case of great crimes not
carried to the end, but done accidentally or by mischance, if they confess
their guilt, you must not put these to death. . . . It is not for you Feng to
punish or put men to death; do not randomly punish or put men to death.
It is not for you Feng to cut o the nose or ears; do not randomly cut o
the nose or ears. . . . In deciding to imprison someone, deliberate upon it
for ve or six days or even for ten days; do not blindly imprison
someone. . . . All those people who are guilty of their own accord, who rob
and steal, are villainous and traitorous, who kill and take others property,
blindly unafraid of death; there are none who do not detest these.


Law

The king said: Feng, of the most vile and detestable, what could be
more so than being unlial or unbrotherly. A son who does not
respectfully serve his father greatly wounds his fathers heart. Or a
father who is unable to love his son brings pain to his son. . . . In pitying
these, if we in government do not arrest the criminals, the righteousness
that Heaven has given our people will be greatly disordered. You must
quickly follow King Wen to determine their guilt, punishing them
without pardon. In following the great laws, how much more so those
who teach others: the governors, minor ministers, the regulators,
responsible for distributing and broadcasting the laws, meeting with
great praise from the people; if they do not consider or use them, they
aict their ruler. These then lead others to be wicked; it is they I detest.
You should quickly follow what is proper and put them to death.

The conception of law as expressed in the Pronouncement to Kang
depends almost exclusively on the discretion of the ruler; it was apparently
up to the ruler even to decide what constituted a crime and what did not.
Another chapter of the Exalted Scriptures, also purports to date to the
Western Zhou period, though to a period a hundred or so years later than
the Pronouncement to Kang. This is the Punishment of L (L xing),
which spells out the various punishments appropriate for dierent crimes.
This code is supposed to date to the reign of King Mu of Zhou (r. –),
and he has been roundly criticized for divorcing the law from the personal
virtue of the ruler. He is even more criticized because the text includes ways
that the mutilating punishments can be avoided by paying nes, essentially
allowing the rich to commit crimes with impunity. However, it is almost
certain that this text dates to a later period, probably toward the end of the
Springs and Autumns period, when several states began to codify their law-
codes and even to inscribe them onto bronze or iron vessels.
There is other evidence that really does come from the Western Zhou
period. It too was inscribed on bronze vessels of that period. But these are
not systematic law codes. Rather, they are the occasional records of actual
law cases. Because of the nature of bronze vessels, which were cast to
commemorate successes in the life of an individual—such as appointments
at the royal court or victories in battle—records of criminal cases are quite
rare. In one case, however, we can see that the paying of a ne to avoid a
mutilating punishment really did take place at this ancient period. The Ying
yi dates to the late Western Zhou dynasty, probably just before or after .
Its inscription records a verdict against someone referred to as Shepherd,

Essays

who apparently broke an agreement that he had with Ying, the person who
cast the vessel, and thus almost certainly the person who won the lawsuit. It
is interesting that Shepherd was initially sentenced to be whipped and
branded, but this punishment was then commuted to a lesser whipping and
the payment of a ne. In the end, it seems that the sentence was reduced just
to the payment of a ne.

It was the third month after the dying brightness, jiashen (day ), the
king was at the Upper Palace of Pang. Elder Yangfu then reached a
verdict, saying: Shepherd, ah, how could you have gone so far! You
have dared to sue your captain, and you have even been duplicitous
regarding your former oath. And now you have again gone against
your oath, so far as to go over the wall to meet with Ying promising to
bring these ve men, and now you have again gone against your oath.
You must again abide by your words and your oath. Would that it can
be proper. I ought to whip you , times and cut your face, but now
I greatly pardon you, and will whip you times and ne you
catties. Elder Yangfu then made Shepherd again swear an oath saying:
From now on if I dare to trouble your minor or major ocers or if
your captain again accuses you, then I will cause you to be whipped
, times and to cut-and-ink your face. Shepherd then swore the
oath in order to report to Ocer Xiong and Ocer Hu at Hui.
Shepherds verdict and oath completed, he was ned bronze. Ying
herewith makes this sacricial ewer.

In another case, the Fifth Year Qiu Wei ding, the inscription of which was
translated in Chapter Four above, provides the record of yet another lawsuit
between two individuals: Qiu Wei, the patron of the vessel, and a States-lord
Li. According to Qiu Weis suit, States-lord Li had promised to turn over to
Qiu Wei ve dierent elds, but States-lord Li apparently reneged on the deal.
The case was heard before a jury of ve person, most of whom are known
from other bronze inscriptions of the period as important senior ocers of
the court. After a brief interrogation, they determined that States-lord Li was
required to relinquish the elds as agreed, their boundaries stipulated. It is
interesting to note that his son and several of his assistants were also required
to treat Qiu Wei to a banquet, as a way of sealing the deal. In later Chinese
history, banquets were routinely held to formalize agreements.
As mentioned above, by the close of the Springs and Autumns period, law
codes began to be formalized, and even inscribed on bronze or iron vessels


Law

such that they were immutable and available for all to see. The rst state to
have done this, in , is said to be the small state of Zheng, under the
leadership of its prime minister Zi Chan (d. ). Zi Chan was harshly
criticized for this by Shu Xiang (d. ), the prime minister of the larger state
of Jin, who argued that in antiquity the law was embodied in the virtue of the
ruler, quoting the Classic of Poetry (Shi jing) as saying:

A proper model the Cultured King,
The ten thousand countries the proof.

According to Shu Xiang, the sage-kings of old, such as King Wen
(r. 1099/1056–1050) had been able to consider all the circumstances of a
case in making their decision on a case-by-case basis, unrestrained by an
overly literal interpretation of the law. By introducing written law, the people
would come to distrust their rulers and become ever more litigious. Many
historians also see this as a transfer of power from the nobility to the
common people. While all of this is doubtless true, it is also true that King
Wen had died over ve hundred years before this time, and that by the time
of Shu Xiang there were no longer any sage-kings in whom to trust. And so,
in , the state of Jin itself cast a vessel, said to have been of iron, inscribed
with its own legal code. This code is supposed to have been the text of the
Book of Punishments, the writing of which is credited to Fan Xuanzi (d. )
some half century earlier.
Over the course of the following Warring States period, every state that
was still independent promulgated similar law codes, whether they cast them
in metal or not. In Wei, Li Kui (–) is said to have written the Classic of
Laws shortly after being appointed prime minister in . Although this
book has long been lost, early quotations suggest that it was divided into
three parts: Formal Statutes, Miscellaneous Statutes, and Statutes
Concerning Losses. The Formal Statutes included crimes against others:
Robbery, Assault, Imprisonment, and Arrests; the Miscellaneous Statutes
concerned personal behavior: Deceit, Illegal Entry into Cities, Gambling,
Fraud, Immodesty, Lewd Behavior, and Overstepping Ones Position; the
Statutes Concerning Losses apparently concerned what we would today term
inventory control. It is said that when Shang Yang (c. –) left his native
state of Wei to go to Qin in about , the one book he took with him was this
Classic of Laws; it would become the foundation of Qins own legal code.
Shang Yangs reforms in Qin pertained to every aspect of the Qin
government, including of course the legal system. The book he is credited

Essays

with writing, The Book of the Lord Shang, has a fully elaborated theory of law,
and is generally regarded as the founding text of the political philosophy
known as Legalism. It would eventuate in the nal dismantling of the
former nobility, replacing it with a bureaucracy that was strictly bound to
interpreting and administering the laws exactly as they were written, with
little room for personal discretion. The best evidence for this legal system
was discovered in 1975 in a tomb at Shuihudi, in present-day Hubei
province. This area was formerly within the state of Chu, but had been
conquered by Qin in and incorporated into the expanding Qin state.
The tomb of a mid-level local magistrate named Happy (Xi; d. ), it
included many of the texts that he would have used during his life to
adjudicate cases. The most important of these documents is a set of eighteen
statutes, covering the following topics: Agriculture, Stables and Parks,
Granaries, Currency, Passes and Markets, Craftsmen, Norms for Craftsmen,
Equalizing Craftsmen, Labor, the Supervisors of Works, Appointments of
Ocials, Checking, Noble Ranks for Military Actions, Rations for Passport
Holders, Transmission of Documents, Ministers of Finance, Commandants,
Dependent States. Almost all of these concern the civil administration of the
government, though they also touch on punishment for failure to carry out
the statutes properly. One example from the statute on Checking, which
refers to inventory control, will give some indication as to just how detailed
these statutes were.

When a granary leaks and rots the grain, as well as when one piles up
grain causing it to go bad, if what is not edible amounts to less than
bushels, then reprimand the foreman; if it is between and
1000 bushels, then ne the foreman one set of armor; if it is more than
, bushels, then ne the foreman two sets of armor. Command the
foreman and the ocers working there jointly to repay the cost of the
grain. If the grain is still edible despite having gone bad, then weigh it.
Determine the responsibility on the basis of the number of bushels
wasted.

As detailed as these statutes were, it was anticipated that there would still
be questions about their interpretation. There is another document, the
longest of all the legal documents in this tomb, that was called by the
archaeologists Answers to Questions about Laws and Statutes. These questions
ask about various extenuating circumstances. For instance, consider the
following scenario:


Law

A stole a cow. When he stole the cow, he was six chi tall (i.e., . m or
about ). After he had been imprisoned for one year, he was again
measured, and was found to be six chi seven cun tall (i.e., . m or
about ). Question: How is A to be judged? He is considered to be a
full wall-pounder.

It is clear here that A was a juvenile when he stole the cow, but that after
spending a year in jail he had reached an adult stature. If he had been judged
while still a juvenile, it is likely that his sentence would have been lighter. But
because he was already an adult when the nal verdict was pronounced, he
was thus sentenced as an adult to hard labor.
Another text, Models for Sealing and Investigating, reads almost like a set
of detective stories, presenting cases of crimes and how the detective
proposed to solve the case. Another case involving a cow will illustrate
something of the avor of these cases.

A Fight over a Cow: Reported in writing: Constable A of such-and-
such village and commoner B brought in one cow; it was a black
female, with a long halter and horns. They reported saying: This is A
and Bs cow, which had run o. We each recognize it. Jointly bringing
it in, we have fought over it. I immediately commanded such-and-
such a clerk to examine the cows teeth (to determine its age); the cow
was six years old.

Not all cases provide a resolution. Nevertheless, they can still be
remarkably informative about the society of the time. The nal case to be
considered here concerns slavery and the right of owners to inict bodily
mutilation upon their slaves, almost wantonly.

Tattooing a Female Slave: Reported in writing: Constable A of such-
and-such village bound and brought in an adult female named C, and
reported saying: I am the headman of alderman B of such-and-such
village. C is Bs female slave. B has sent A to say: C is unruly. I petition
to tattoo her and cut o her nose. Interrogating C, she said: I am Bs
female slave. I have not been charged with any crime. Prefect so-and-
so reports to the chief of such-and-such district: Constable A of such-
and-such village brought in Bs adult female named C, saying: B
commands A to petition to tattoo her and cut o her nose. Is this as
he says or not? Make certain of the name, aair, and village, any

Essays

crimes for which she has been charged, and whether she has been
questioned again or not. Report in writing.

There are other cases, unfortunately too long to be considered here, that
take up a number of especially dicult cases. In the case of one murder, the
detective was required to provide a forensic examination of the body, and a
complete description of the crime scene, including footprints. In another, a
woman six months pregnant miscarried; it is clear that she was suspected of
aborting the fetus. A female bondwoman was made to give her a vaginal
examination, while others interrogated other members of the womans
household. Finally, there is another case in which a doctor is called in to
examine a man suspected of having leprosy. The doctors report of his
examination leaves no doubt about the diagnosis: C has no eyebrows. The
bridge of his nose is gone, his nostrils are rotted, and when I pricked his nose
he did not sneeze. The diagnosis: leprosy.
It is clear from all of these documents buried together with Happy in the
tomb at Shuihudi that these legal codes were intended as much to ensure
that ocials performed their duties correctly as they were to regulate the
common people. Indeed, these statutes were an important step in the
development of bureaucracy in China, the lasting achievement of Legalism.