CHAPTER
THE BASIC ANNALS OF QIN

Although the Qin dynasty (–) was far and away the shortest of
Chinas major dynasties, ocially lasting only fourteen years, not only was it
one of the oldest states of ancient China, but its legacy has proved to be as
long lasting as that of the Zhou dynasty, which preceded it. Indeed, even the
name by which China is known throughout most of the world—China—
derives from Qin (pronounced like chin). Qin is supposed to have ruled
with a harsh hand, one that caused the recently conquered peoples to resent
it. Whatever the truth of this, it is certainly the case that the dynasty that
succeeded it, the Han ( BCE– CE), adopted most of the Qin
administrative innovations, even while reviling the Qin as barbaric. This
Han prejudice against Qin has inuenced most subsequent appraisals of the
dynasty. It has only been in recent years, with new archaeological discoveries
revealing much about the early history of the state, long before it became the
predominant power of the Warring States period, and also about the
government administration after its conquest of those other states, that
historians have begun to revise their views of Qin. While it is true that Qin
did introduce many innovations, some of them most certainly harsh, it is
also the case that Qin was deeply conservative in its cultural practices,
preserving much of the Zhou dynasty legacy.
The origins of the Qin people, a people bearing the surname Ying, was
one of the major debates of twentieth-century historiography, with some
employing some archaeological evidence to argue that Qin came from the
western Warriors (often translated as barbarians) while others employed
other archaeological evidence to argue that they came from the eastern
Peoples (yet another term also often translated as barbarians). The common
denominator of these two arguments, of course, was that Qin was somehow
barbarian. Records of the Historian, which after all, is supposed to have been
based—at least in this part—on the annals of the Qin court itself, claimed
that an early Qin ancestor named Feilian was an ally of the last Shang kings,
thus placing Qin in the east. This tradition recently received strong

Basic Annals

corroboration from the newly unearthed Tsinghua University manuscript
Xinian or Annals, which says that Feilian joined with Luzi Sheng, the
ostensible son of King Zhu, also known as Di Xin (r. 1086–1046), the last
king of the Shang dynasty, in his brief rebellion against the Zhou conquerors.
According to the Annals, Feilian attempted to ee eastward into what is
today the province of Shandong, probably at or near the place where the
Duke of Zhou would later establish the Zhou colony of Lu; Feilian was killed
there by the pursuing Zhou. The Annals goes on to record that the remaining
Qin people were then forced to migrate to Zhuyu, identied as a mountain
in present-day Gansu province, to the west of even Zhou itself. There they
were supposed to provide a barrier between Zhou and its western enemies.
This would seem to explain the conicting archaeological evidence
concerning Qin cultural practices: it originated in the east but long lived in
the west, and so adopted practices of both areas.
More recent archaeological excavations provide material support for the
Annals account. For instance, an early Qin settlement site has been excavated
at Majiaping, Gansu, very near to Zhuyu Mountain, where the Qin people
were supposed to have been transferred. Tomb-robbing at another nearby
mountain, Dabuzishan in Lixian county, Gansu, alerted local archaeologists
to yet another settlement site—indeed, very probably an early capital of
Qin—near which there was a cemetery with tombs of two dierent Qin
lords; these tombs contained bronze vessels bearing inscriptions indicating
that they were made for Dukes of Qin. This too has prompted a debate
among historians as to which dukes of Qin they may have been, and also
explained the provenance of numerous other bronze vessels with similar
inscriptions that had come onto the antique market in the 1990s; they must
have come from other tombs at Dabuzishan that had been robbed before the
archaeologists arrived on the scene.
The most likely identications for the two tombs excavated at Dabuzishan
are Duke Zhuang (r. –) and Duke Xiang (r. –), whose reigns
coincided with a period of increasing relations between Qin and the kings of
Zhou. This was a time when the Zhou capital area was coming under attack by
the western power Xianyun. The Bamboo Annals records that Qin Zhong, the
immediate predecessor of Duke Zhuang, was commanded by King Xuan of
Zhou (r. –) to attack the Xianyun; however, the attack was unsuccessful,
and Qin Zhong was killed. It was Duke Zhuang who took revenge for this, and
consolidated Qin control over the Jing River valley of eastern Gansu and
western Shaanxi. During the reign of Duke Xiang, Qin again came to the aid
of the Zhou kings, though the Zhou capital itself was overrun by the Xianyun

Qin

and the last king of Western Zhou, King You (r. –) was killed. Qin allied
for the rst time with the powerful state of Jin, located northeast of the Zhou
capital along the north-south stretch of the Yellow River, to protect the Zhou
move to their eastern capital at Luoyang in present-day Henan.
Step by step, Qin began moving eastward, rst to the area of modern
Baoji, Shaanxi, and then later, in , to still closer to the old Zhou homeland
area of the Zhouyuan, where they established a new capital called Yong. This
would remain the Qin capital for more than three hundred years. It was
there that another important early Qin archaeological discovery was made.
In 1978, eight bells were discovered at Taigongmiao—the Temple of the
Great Duke—Shaanxi, near this new capital. All eight bells bore the same
inscription, the content showing that they had been cast for Duke Wu of Qin
(r. –), and reveals too that his wife, Wang Ji, was a daughter of the
Zhou king himself. More important, the inscription suggests that the rulers
of Qin were already beginning to think of themselves as the proper rulers of
all China. It is worth quoting in full.
The Duke of Qin said: Our ancestors received the Mandate of Heaven,
and were awarded residence and received the territory. Valiant and
radiant were Duke Wen, Duke Jing and Duke Xian, grandly advancing
on high and radiantly joining august Heaven to bring under control the
barbarian lands. The duke said to his consort Wang Ji: I the small child
morning and night assiduously respect my sacrices in order to receive
many blessings, to be able to enlighten my heart and harmonize the
administrators and sires, and to nurture all those to my left and right.
Being abundantly and truly proper I have received bright virtue to use
peace and stability to bring together my territory and have begun to
bring about the submission of all the barbarian peoples. I make these
harmonic bells, their perfect pitch being duan-duan and yong-yong, in
order to entertain the august lords and to receive great blessings, pure
favor, many gifts, and a long-life of ten thousand years. May the dukes
of Qin reign in position and receive the great mandate and extend it
throughout the four quarters. May they be treasured in peace.
In the decades after the reign of Duke Wu, Qin grew to be the predominant
power in the Wei River valley of western China, the former capital region of
the Zhou kings. Its growing inuence brought it into contact with—and
occasional conict with—the state of Jin to its east, which was then also
growing in power. Jin was based in present-day Shanxi province along the

Basic Annals

Fen River, which like the Wei River of Shaanxi province, where Qin was now
based, was one of the two major tributaries of the Yellow River. These two
river valleys form one continuous geological formation, separated only by
the north-south stretch of the Yellow River. The two states periodically fought
for control of the fertile strip of land on the west bank of the Yellow River.
The early peak of Qin power came during the lengthy reign of Duke Mu
(r. –), a reign that coincided with several important developments in
the eastern states, and especially in the state of Jin. First, in , Duke Huan
of Qi, long recognized as the premier among the rulers of all of the states,
died, setting o a succession struggle within his own state that weakened it
for generations to follow. Jin was poised to assume the predominant position
among the states, but it too was riven by domestic turmoil and fraternal
battles. Jin lords alternately sought support from Duke Mu, and doublecrossed him. In the end, Duke Mu lent his support to Chonger, one of the Jin
princes who had long been in exile. In , with the active support of Duke
Mu of Qin, Chonger reentered Jin, and claimed his position as ruler; he
would be known posthumously as Duke Wen of Jin (r. –). As long as
he was alive, relations between Qin and Jin were peaceful. However, after his
death in , the alliance between Jin and Qin dissolved, and the two states
again began to attack each other. In , Duke Mu personally led an army
into Jin territory, but in the end he was unsuccessful. This would bring to an
end for more than three centuries any hopes that Qin might have had to
expand toward the east. Instead, it returned its attention to the west and the
south.
Duke Mus death in was commemorated by one of the most
memorable poems of the Classic of Poetry: The Yellow Bird. Three noblemen
of the Ziju lineage of the ducal clan had promised to accompany the duke to
his grave. The poem consists of three stanzas, each describing one of the
three noblemen. The rst stanza is representative of all three.
Kriu-kriu calls the yellow bird, Stopping on that bush of thorns.
Who will follow the Ripened Duke? Sudden Rester of the Ziju.
Let it be this Sudden Rester, A special one of a hundred.
Looking down upon his pit, Trembling, trembling is his shaking.
That azure heaven up above, How it cuts o our nest men.
Oh, if we could but ransom him, A hundred men would give their lives.
Another tomb of another Qin duke reveals something of the wealth that
the state was able to accumulate in the aftermath of Duke Mus death. The

Qin

tomb of Duke Jing (r. –), in Fengxiang county, Shaanxi, just outside of
the Qin capital Yong, was so large that its excavation took ten years, from
1976 until 1986. It is far and away the largest tomb anywhere in China (or all
of Asia, for that matter, including the more famous tomb of the First
Emperor), over meters long and covering an area of 5334 square meters.
Although the tomb chamber itself had long since been emptied by tomb
robbers (archaeologists counted dierent shafts dug by tomb-robbers
over the centuries), a ledge just above the tomb chamber revealed the
remains of people who were killed to accompany the duke in death, and
the tomb ll contained remains of another twenty persons, an eerie reminder
of the three noblemen who accompanied Duke Mu to his grave just about
one hundred years earlier.
During these three centuries, Qin seems to have been content in what
was now its homeland of the Wei River valley, a fertile agricultural zone
protected on all side by mountain barriers. In the fth and early fourth
centuries BCE, especially during the reign of Duke Xian (r. –), Qin
began to expand again, but this time to the south. In , it defeated the
southwestern state of Shu for control of the Qinling Mountains and the
headwaters of the Han River. The Qinling Mountains were a natural barrier
between the Wei River valley that was the center of Qin and the vast Chengdu
plain to the west in present-day Sichuan, which Shu had long controlled, and
the Han River Valley to the east, which led to the heartland of the major
southern state of Chu. By the middle of the century, Qins expansion down
the Han River brought it into frequent contact—and frequent conict with
Chu. From this time on, Chu would be one of two great adversaries of Qin.
In the middle of the fourth century, Qin also moved its capital from near
present-day Baoji, Shaanxi further east to Xianyang, near present-day Xian.
This move of the capital brought about an important demographic shift
among the Qin people: whereas most tombs from about until this time
have been excavated in the western part of present-day Shaanxi province,
beginning in the middle of the fourth century almost all tombs are found in
the vicinity of the new capital. This eastward shift of the capital also
announced Qins renewed urge to expand toward the east and to confront
the other states there. This was an initiative spearheaded by Gongsun Yang,
better known as Wei Yang or Shang Yang (d. ). Shang Yang was a foreigner,
who traveled to Qin from his native Wei, eventually becoming chancellor of
state under Duke Xiao (r. –). He is generally credited with instituting
a series of administrative reforms that strengthened the Qin government.
These reforms took agriculture and warfare as the foundation of the Qin

Basic Annals

state. They were codied in a series of laws that were ruthlessly enforced.
Among these laws was the provision that the law would extend equally to all
members of society, regardless of their social status, doing away with the
age-old dispensation from punishment for members of the nobility. This
included even the crown-prince, the future Lord Huiwen (r. /–).
On the other hand, in order to encourage people to join the army Shang
Yang also devised a system of ranks that could be won through military
accomplishments. Based on the ranks that they won, soldiers were given
elds of a specic size to farm. Sons were to inherit lower ranks than their
fathers, giving them an incentive to join the army as well and to win their
own ranks. There was another important advantage to these ranks: people
convicted of crimes could exchange their ranks for reduced sentences,
including avoiding mutilating punishments.
The need to reward soldiers with elds led Qin to redistribute the land of
the entire realm. To deal with this need, Qin developed a sophisticated
administrative structure to keep track of its people, who were the most
important assets to the state. The state kept detailed records for each
household, listing the name, age, and rank of each member. They also
organized the households into ve-family units that were responsible for
each others obligations. Male members of the household had to register for
state service at the age of eighteen, and one man from each household was
required to work for the state for one month each year on such state projects
as digging ditches, canals, and irrigation works, and building roads, dikes,
and walls. With this labor, the state embarked on a massive infrastructure
project, creating thirty-one counties, linked by a consolidated road system.
The state also standardized the size of elds, which were marked o into
long rectangles by wider and narrower footpaths, making it easy to calculate
the taxes owed for each eld. It is interesting that the results of these
infrastructure projects, and especially the land distribution markers, are still
visible in satellite images of the area today.
As successful as Shang Yangs reforms were, they also created many
enemies for him, especially among the nobility. When his patron Duke Xiao
died in , Duke Huiwen accused Shang Yang of conspiring to rebel against
him, and ordered that he and his entire family be executed. Shang Yangs
execution was by the particularly grisly dismemberment by chariot, in
which his limbs and neck were tied to ve separate chariots, all pulling in
dierent directions. Shang Yang is credited with having written the book The
Book of the Lord Shang, which provides a philosophical rationale for his
administrative reforms and especially for his notion of government by laws.

Qin

This book is generally regarded as the rst expression of the system of
thought that would come to be known as Legalism. Although Legalism was
later reviled by Confucians, it was adapted by most governments throughout
Chinese history.
Lord Huiwens succession was celebrated by the states of Chu and Shu,
among others, as well as by the Zhou king. Taking advantage of the wealth
and stability that Shang Yangs administrative reforms had brought about,
Lord Huiwen initiated a series of military campaigns directed against the
state of Wei, one of the states into which the former great state of Jin had
divided. In , Qin nally retook the areas along the Yellow River that Qin
and Jin had fought over more than three hundred years earlier. Then, in ,
following a fashion that rulers of the other states had adopted in the
preceding decades, Huiwen declared himself king of Qin. In the following
decade, Qin won a series of decisive battles, against all three of the successor
states of the Jin, as well as against the far northern states of Yan and Qi. More
important, in , Qin would decisively defeat Shu for control of the
Chengdu Plain. This would prove to be the granary that would feed the
armies that carried the Qin campaigns over the course of the following
century, campaigns that eventually culminated in the unied empire. Four
years later, in , Qin attacked down the Han River, winning a large amount
of land there, which they turned into yet another new Qin administrative
district: the Central Han County.
King Huiwens son King Wu of Qin (r. –) reigned for only four
years. He was succeeded in turn by the young King Zhaoxiang (r. –).
Although his succession was contested by others, and the early years of his
reign saw several notable military setbacks, by the 290s he appointed the
general Bai Qi (d. ), originally a nobleman from Chu, to lead the Qin
armies. In the more than thirty years that Bai Qi led the army, he is said to
have captured more than seventy cities and to have killed more than a
million enemy soldiers, without ever suering a single defeat. Among his
more notable victories was the defeat and occupation of the great state of
Chu in . Added to its earlier defeat and occupation of Shu, this brought
almost the entire Yangzi River valley, including its largest tributary the Han
River, under the control of Qin. His nal victory came in . After months
of erce ghting with the state of Zhao, during which the Qin army was on
the brink of starvation, King Zhaoxiang nally ordered the aged Bai Qi to
take personal control of the army. Bai Qi feigned a retreat, withdrawing his
army to a strongly fortied position and drawing the Zhao army into a trap.
He sent his cavalry around the Zhao army cutting it o from its supply train.

Basic Annals

The Zhao army dug in at a place called Changping, in the southern part of
present-day Shanxi province. The Qin army, reinforced by the local
inhabitants who were promised by King Zhaoxiang that they would all be
rewarded by one degree of rank, surrounded them. After forty-six days, the
Zhao army numbering , men nally surrendered. Bai Qi ordered all
but young boys to be buried alive. Sparing the boys was not a
humanitarian gesture, but rather was intended for them to return to the
Zhao capital and spread the word of how ferocious the Qin army was. In
1995, local archaeologists in Changping county, Shanxi, uncovered a trench
in which they found numerous skeletons, perhaps some of the Zhao soldiers
who had been buried alive.
Two years later, Bai Qi was sent again to attack the Zhao capital. However,
in the meantime Zhao had rebuilt its army and repaired its relations with
other states, who decided to resist the Qin advance. When Bai Qi objected to
King Zhaoxiang that the Zhao capital was impregnable, Zhaoxiang sent his
premier, Fan Ju (d. ), to order him to attack nonetheless. Bai Qi feigned
illness and refused to do so. With this, the king replaced him, demoted him
to the rank of a common soldier, and ordered him to man the defense lines
on Qins western border. When the renewed Qin attack on the Zhao capital
failed, the king sent Bai Qi a sword and ordered him to commit suicide. Bai
Qi is said to have exclaimed that his only crime was to have killed the
defenseless Zhao soldiers at the battle of Changping; with that he slit his own
throat and died.
After the lengthy reign of King Zhaoxiang, the reigns of the next two Qin
kings, King Xiaowen (r. ) and King Zhuangxiang (r. –), were
especially short. Prior to his succession, King Zhuangxiang, whose personal
name was Ying Yiren, had been held as a hostage in the state of Zhao, a result
of Qins defeat by Zhao ten years earlier. There he came to know a wealthy
merchant named L Buwei (–), who used bribes to have him selected
as the heir apparent. When Zhuangxiang became king, he appointed L
Buwei as his chancellor, in charge of the government. When the king then
died in the fourth year of his reign, he was succeeded by his teenage son,
Ying Zheng (b. ; r. – as king of Qin, then – as Qin Shi
Huangdi, the First Emperor). L Buwei continued as chancellor, and even as
regent for the young boy. Throughout Chinese history there have been
insinuations that L Buwei was actually Ying Zhengs biological father, since
his mother had been a consort of L Buwei before marrying King
Zhuangxiang; this was probably a rumor started in the following Han
dynasty to disparage both of these kings.

Qin

In , while L Buwei was still chancellor, he became involved in the rst
threat against King Zheng. Fearful that King Zheng would learn that his
mother, Queen Dowager Zhao, had been his consort prior to being married
to King Zhuangxiang, L Buwei plotted through a series of complicated
disguises to have her replaced by a man. This man, Lao Ai, subsequently
became her lover, and the two had two sons of their own. In , they
attempted to overthrow King Zheng in an attempt to name one of their own
sons to be king. King Zheng foiled the plot and had Lao Ai torn apart by the
chariots, the same method of execution that had been carried out one
hundred years earlier against Shang Yang. L Buwei was granted the honor
of committing suicide by drinking poison, which he did in , thus ending
one of the more curious chapters in Chinas long history of court intrigue.
L Buwei was replaced as chancellor by Li Si (c. –). Li Si had been
a student of the great Confucian philosopher Xunzi (c. –), but turned
his back on Confucian moralism and espoused the Legalist doctrines of
Shang Yang, which were still popular in Qin. He would remain chancellor for
twenty-seven years, throughout the remainder of Ying Zhengs reign both as
king of Qin and as First Emperor, and even into the reign of the Second
Emperor (r. –). He would play a major role in creating the Qin empire.
The campaigns that led to the creation of that empire began in . The rst
of the six remaining states to fall was the neighboring state of Han, followed
two years later by its nemesis of thirty years earlier—and the state where
Ying Zheng had been born—Zhao. Over the next seven years, the remaining
states would fall one by one: rst Yan, then Wei, then Chu, and nally, in
the northeastern state of Qi. For the rst time since the end of the Western
Zhou dynasty in —and really for the rst time ever—almost all of China
was united under a single ruler. Ying Zheng proclaimed a new title for
himself: Shi Huangdi, the First Emperor, and had an ancient jade carved
with a text written by Li Si: Received the Mandate from Heaven, May He Be
Long-lived and Eternally Flourishing. This seal of authority would be passed
from ruler to ruler and from dynasty to dynasty for over a thousand years
before nally being lost in the tenth century CE.
Having conquered their enemies in the east, Qin now needed to devise a
means to govern them. Some advisors argued that Qin should follow the
model of the earlier Zhou dynasty, appointing relatives of the royal family to
rule them as quasi-colonies. But the First Emperor rejected this model,
extending instead the administrative structure that Qin had used in its own
state since the time of Shang Yang, organizing the empire into thirty-six
commanderies, more or less the equivalent of modern provinces. Under

Basic Annals

these, there were counties, townships and neighborhoods. Each of these was
responsible for reporting to the level above it, with the commanderies
reporting directly to the capital. Recent archaeological discoveries at the
small village of Liye in western Hunan province show that even the periphery
of the Qin empire was in constant communication with levels above it, and
those levels transmitted to it orders from the capital. This communication
was facilitated by the infrastructure projects Qin had undertaken in the
preceding century, the pace of construction accelerating still further with
the unication. Other reforms were also intended to unite the country. These
included standardizing the axle-widths of carts (akin to standardizing the
gauge of railroad tracks in more recent history), standardizing units of
weights and measure, and standardizing as well the currency. Another
standardization may have been the most important: the standardization of
the script. Prior to the Qin unication, each of the independent states had
developed its own way of writing. With unication, and with the centralized
administration of the government, all reports were required to be written in
the same script, that which had been in use in Qin. While many of the Qin
reforms were very forward looking, the reform of the script was actually
quite conservative: the script used in Qin evolved directly from that of the
Zhou royal house some ve hundred years before.
These reforms were all constructive, and would be looked back upon
favorably by later Chinese historians. Two other reforms, however, would
provoke unending criticism. In , acting upon a memorial written by Li Si
designed to unify thought as well, the First Emperor decreed that most
books were to be burned. Excluded from this prohibition were practical
books—those concerning such topics as the annals of the state of Qin, as
well as astrology, agriculture, divination, and medicine. The classical
literature, especially the Poetry and Scriptures, by then associated with
Confucian teaching, were especially prohibited. In the following year, of
the ocials at court, all of them having attained their position on the basis
of their traditional education, are said to have been buried alive. Li Si
certainly wrote the memorial recommending the abolition of books, but it is
now much debated just how eective it really was. It is also doubtful that the
scholars at court were buried alive, it being likely that this charge was
invented during the subsequent Han dynasty as a way of justifying the
overthrowal of the Qin.
In , the First Emperor, by then almost sixty years old, undertook his
fth tour of the eastern portions of his empire. In September of that year, he
became ill and died in Pingyuan county in the northwestern part of

Qin

Shandong province. Li Si, who was traveling with the emperor, determined
to keep the death secret from all but a handful of people including Ying
Huhai, a young son of the First Emperor, and Zhao Gao (d. ), allegedly
the tutor of Huhai. While returning the corpse to the capital at Xianyang, a
two-month wagon journey to the west, Li Si is said to have forged an order
from the First Emperor naming the young son Huhai to be his successor,
apparently because he would be easy to control. Fearful that the plot would
be discovered, the forged order also commanded the First Emperors eldest
son and presumptive heir, Fusu, to commit suicide. Also ordered to commit
suicide was Meng Tian, who, as commander-in-chief of the Qin army, was a
rival power. Fusu and Meng Tian did as they were ordered, and Huhai
became the Second Emperor. Before long Zhao Gao moved against Li Si,
accusing him of plotting against the Second Emperor. In , Li Si was
sentenced to die by the Five Punishments, not to be confused with death by
Five Chariots; this form of execution entailed each of the usual forms of
mutilation: rst cutting o the nose, then a hand, then a foot, then castration,
and nally being cut in half at the waist. In the next year, Zhao Gao turned
on the Second Emperor himself, assassinating him and installing a young
boy, Ying Ziying, ostensibly Huhais son, as emperor. On the day that Ziying
was to be installed as the third emperor of Qin, Ziying ordered that Zhao
Gao be executed as well. Ziying did become emperor, and reigned for fortysix days, before surrendering the city of Xianyang in January of BCE to
Liu Bang (–), the eventual founding emperor of the Han dynasty
(r. –). Later that year, when Xiang Yu (c. –), then an ally but
soon to become an adversary of Liu Bang, arrived at Xianyang, he ordered
that Ziying be executed along with all male members of the imperial family.
This brought an ignominious end to the short-lived Qin dynasty.
The Qin dynasty and especially the First Emperor have been criticized
throughout most of Chinese history for their harsh policies. Their policies
were harsh, to be sure, but they were not particularly extraordinary for their
day, and from their own perspective were designed to bring about peace and
security for the state and its people. In retrospect, much of the criticism,
coming from the succeeding Han dynasty, was self-interested, intended to
justify its own rule. Virtually unacknowledged at the time was to just what
extent Han administration was indebted to the Qin reforms. A telling
anecdote illustrates the debt: when the Qin capital Xianyang was being
pillaged at the end of the Qin dynasty, most of the pillagers sought the many
treasures there. However, one of the advisers to Liu Bang took Qins
administrative documents, census records, and maps, knowing that these

Basic Annals

were the real treasures of government. To the extent that the administration
of the Qin government became the model for not just the Han dynasty, but
for most succeeding dynasties and governments down to the present day, it
is understandable that the name for China throughout most of the world
derives from Qin.