CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF CONSORT HAO

Among the numerous persons mentioned in Shang-dynasty oracle-bone
inscriptions, the one that has attracted the most attention from both
specialists and the general public is Consort Hao (Fu Hao). One of the
numerous wives of King Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189), she appears as the topic
of hundreds of divinations, which show her as very much at the center of
aairs at the Shang court. Some of these divinations concerned her birth-
giving, as we might expect of a woman, royal or otherwise, and it seems clear
that she was the mother of at least one of Wu Dings sons who became king,
probably Zu Geng (r. c. 1188–1179). However, many other divinations show
clearly that she took full part in several of the military campaigns of Wu
Dings reign, both raising troops and also leading them into battle. The rst
publication of these inscriptions drew added attention, coinciding as it did
with the global womens surage movement and a nascent womens liberation
movement even in China.
The inscriptions concerning Consort Hao were also the focus of the most
important debate among modern historians of the Shang dynasty. This
debate concerns the methodology of dating the oracle-bone inscriptions,
and as such is far too complicated to review in full here. It will have to suce
to say that divinations about her belong to two dierent types of inscriptions:
one type that can certainly be dated to the reign of King Wu Ding, and one
type that could either belong to the same time or to another reign or pair of
reigns almost one hundred years later. For fty or more years after the rst
eorts to date these inscriptions, the leading view was that the second type
of inscription should date to the later period, and thus that there were two
dierent people of the same name: Consort Hao. According to this view,
power at the Shang court oscillated between two dierent factions: one that
it termed the Old School, characterized by the inscriptions certainly dateable
to the reign of King Wu Ding, and another termed the New School, pioneered
by one of Wu Dings sons, who introduced new rituals to the court. These
scholars argued that in addition to the new rituals, the New School would

Biographies

Figure . Statue of Consort Hao at Yinxu (Waste of Yin) archaeological site;
Anyang, Henan; photo by Zhou Yuwei, used with permission.

have brought in an entirely dierent cast of personnel, but that when power
reverted to the Old School, descendants of the people who had served at Wu
Dings court came back to power. In a modern context, this might be
comparable to the Clintons and Bushes exchanging power in the United
States, but over the course of a century rather than just a few decades.
In the early 1970s, new discoveries of oracle bones at Anyang showed that
this periodization was fundamentally awed. While there was certainly
something of a theological reform that took place under one of the sons of
Wu Ding, and thus the notion of an Old School and New School still has
merit, after this reform there was no oscillation back to the Old School. With
respect to the two dierent types of inscriptions concerning Consort Hao, it
was demonstrated that both of them dated to the time of Wu Ding, and thus
that there was only one person named Consort Hao. But even these
discoveries would elicit scholarly debates, debates that are still ongoing in
some quarters of Chinese historical studies.
The earliest mention of Consort Hao in the oracle-bone inscriptions, in a
type of inscription known as the Shi-group, dating to perhaps 1210, concerns
her giving birth:


Consort Hao

Crack-making on jiashen (day ), armed: Consort Hao will have a
child. Eighth month.

More divinations about her giving birth would follow. Verications to some
of these divinations show that she gave birth to at least two girls, and there is
indirect evidence that she gave birth to at least one boy—a boy who would
go on to be the king to succeed Wu Ding: Zu Geng.
It was by the last stage of oracle bones from Wu Dings reign, perhaps two
decades later in time, that Consort Hao is mentioned numerous times in the
context of military campaigns. The following two divinations were both
recorded on a single turtle-shell from this period, perhaps about 1195.

Armed: The king will command Consort Hao to ally with Archer-
Lord Gao to attack Ren.
Crack-making on xinwei (day ), Zheng armed: Consort Hao will
ally with Zhi Guo to attack Ba Land, the king attacking from Eastern
Fen and defending Fu Haos position.

The campaign against Ba Land seems to have been the opening salvo in a
lengthy war—perhaps lasting as long as ve years. Although it seems to have
begun with Shang attacks against Ba Land and two other statelets probably
located in what is today southwestern Shanxi province, this seems to have
precipitated attacks against Shang by two larger powers located farther to
the north: the Earth Land and Spade Land. At least at the beginning of
the hostilities with Earth Land, Fu Hao was still very much involved in the
Shang attack.

Crack-making on xinsi (day ), Zheng armed: If this spring the
king raises men and calls out to Consort Hao to attack Earth Land, we
will receive aid in it. Fifth month.

However, as the war against Earth Land and Spade Land continued over
the course of the next three years, even though hundreds of divinations were
performed about Shang attacks against them, Consort Hao was never again
mentioned. Instead, we nd a number of inscriptions that seem to suggest
that she had died. These are not unproblematic. Most of them are very short,
and several are broken into small fragments. More important, we ought
always to remember that divinations were performed prior to an event, and

Biographies

merely reected what the Shang king wished to happen; only in cases when
there is an after-the-fact verication can we be sure that something really
did happen. Finally, several of these inscriptions rely on comparisons with
what we think we know about the Shang kings relations with the ancestors
(and ancestresses) in order to be understood. Nevertheless, taken together,
they seem to show that Consort Hao had died.

Armed: As for the kings nightmare, it is not Consort Hao causing
harm.
. . . on xinchou (day ), we will oer Consort Hao sacrice.
Crack-making on jimao (day ), Bin armed: It is God (Di) who has
taken Consort Hao in marriage.

The last of these inscriptions, suggesting that Di, the Shang high god, had
taken Consort Hao in marriage, may have been an honor for her, though it
may also have caused King Wu Dings nightmare.
In 1975, Consort Hao re-entered the global consciousness when her
tomb was unearthed just outside of the Shang royal palace precincts in
Anyang, Henan. The mouth of the tomb had been covered by a layer of pis,
a form of stamped-earth that was used for wall building and for the
foundations of buildings; presumably it was the foundation of a temple
erected over the tomb. When it hardens, pis becomes as hard as concrete. In
this case, it had the happy eect of protecting the tomb from tomb robbers,
such that it was undisturbed until being opened by the archaeologists of the
Institute of Archaeology of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In fact,
it was the rst tomb of any signicance at Anyang that had not previously
been robbed. What they found was astonishing. Although the tomb itself
was only of medium size, its furnishings were surely t for a queen. It
contained over bronze vessels and weapons, many of the vessels of the
greatest artistic perfection; jade pieces, some of them obviously already
more than a thousand years old when they came into Consort Haos
possession; and over , cowrie shells, an object of value in ancient China.
More than sixty of the bronze vessels bore inscriptions, many of them with
the name Fu Hao, showing that this was indeed her tomb.
Prior to this discovery, the periodization of Shang bronze vessels had
been the subject of the same sort of periodization debate as outlined above
for oracle bones. The prevailing view was that the ornamentation on the
vessels had developed at a more or less constant slow pace, with the most


Consort Hao

ornate vessels being produced only at the end of the dynasty. What is more,
most scholars believed that the earliest inscriptions on bronze vessels also
dated to the very end of the dynasty, some hundred years after the time of
King Wu Ding. When Consort Haos tomb was rst excavated, the advanced
ornamentation on the vessels and especially the inscriptions on them caused
many archaeologists, relying on the old periodization of oracle-bone
inscriptions, to suspect that this Consort Hao must be the queen of a later
Shang king. However, for archaeologists in China, the best indicator of
archaeological date is the day-to-day pottery found in tombs, and not such
luxury items as bronze and jade. The pottery in Consort Haos tomb showed
conclusively that it dates to the time of Wu Ding after all. This required a
reconceptualization of the development of bronze casting in the Shang
dynasty. It was necessary to conclude that rather than developing at a
constant slow pace, there must have been an explosion of new styles
introduced to the Shang artisans late in the reign of Wu Ding. It seems likely
that at least some of this innovation was prompted by the Shang contact
with western peoples during their expansion to the west of the Taihang
Mountains, an expansion that had been led—at least in part—by Fu Hao
herself. Thus, Consort Hao was instrumental in her own time in the fortunes
of the Shang court, and she has been just as instrumental in the modern
understanding of that court.