CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF BIAN QUE

Qin Yueren, also known as the Physician from Lu, but best known as Bian
Que (d. ), was the most famous medical doctor of ancient China. It is
likely that the name Bian Que referred to some medical technique (perhaps
alluding to the scalpel used in surgery), and thus was a general term for
excellent physicians; the Biography of Bian Que chapter of Records of the
Historian recounts events from the seventh century through the early fourth
century, and anecdotes in other sources would extend this to still earlier and
still later times. In one story that would date to the seventh century, he is said
to have been traveling through the state of Guo, near the great bend of the
Yellow River at present-day Sanmenxia, Henan, when he saw the people
mourning the death of the crown prince; he diagnosed the condition not as
death, but as corpse stumbling, a condition that he was able to reverse by
rechanneling the yin and yang within the boys body. This of course not only
earned Bian Que the gratitude of the ruler of Guo, but also made him famous
throughout all of the states. It is also unclear where he may have been from,
suggesting that he was an itinerant doctor who traveled from state to state.
During these travels, he was something of a shape-shifter, a specialist in
gynecology in one state, in geriatrics in another, and pediatrics in yet another.
Everywhere he went, he is said to have had an almost clairvoyant ability to
detect illness, apparently through his ability to read a persons pulse. Indeed,
the school of medicine that subsequently assumed his name was most
associated with the diagnosis of pulse and the meridians or channels within
the body, which has always been a fundamental skill of traditional Chinese
medicine. He is credited with the authorship of the Classic of Dicult Cases,
which is supposed to have been a direct precursor to the famous Inner
Classic of the Yellow Emperor. All of this is but part of the legend of Bian Que.
It seems likely that the historical gure most likely to have been given this
name lived through most of the fourth century. In the latest account in
which he gures, he cured King Wu of Qin (r. –). However, in doing
so, he angered the kings counsellors, and especially the court physician.

Biographies

According to this account, Li Xi, that court physician, was jealous of Bian
Ques skills and had him assassinated. This is probably as close to history as
we are likely to get in the dicult case of Bian Que.
According to his biography in Records of the Historian, an elderly traveler
named Lord Long Mulberry (Chang Sang jun), said elsewhere to have been
a teacher of the famous Daoist writer Zhuangzi ( c. –), gave medicines
to Bian Que and taught him how to use them, recognizing the potential in
him to be an excellent doctor. The biography continues that after Bian Que
prepared these medicines and ingested them for thirty days, he developed a
sort of X-ray vision, able to see the condition of peoples internal organs (and
even able to see through a stone wall) just by looking at them. Most likely,
this referred to his ability to understand peoples health on the basis of their
pulse. Another story about him also anticipates one of the miracles of
modern medicine. The Liezi, traditionally regarded as the third of the great
Daoist texts, but one that was surely written retrospectively in the early
centuries of the common era, tells the story of a double heart transplant that
Bian Que is supposed to have performed.

The two men Gong Hu of Lu and Qi Ying of Zhao were both ill, and both
visited Bian Que to seek treatment. Bian Que treated them and they both
got better. He said to Gong Hu and Qi Ying: The illnesses that you
suered from before had entered from outside and were lodged in the
internal organs and so could be treated with herbs and acupuncture.
However, you now have congenital illnesses, that have increased as you
have aged; how about if I cure you of them? The two men said: Could
we rst hear of the symptoms? Bian Que said to Gong Hu: Your will is
strong but your qi is weak; it is enough to make plans but too little to
nish them. Qi Yings will is weak but his qi is strong; therefore he plans
too little and harms himself in being too focused. If I switch your hearts
then it will even out the strengths. Bian Que then gave the two men an
anaesthetic liquor to drink, and both fell into a coma for three days. He
opened their chests and took their hearts, switched them and replaced
them. Giving them a spiritual drug, they awoke and were like new. The
two men said their goodbyes. Gong Hu returned to Qi Yings house and
hugged his wife and children, but they did not recognize him. Qi Ying
likewise returned to Gong Hus house, hugged his wife and children, and
they too did not recognize him. Because of this the two families sued
each other, and sought testimony from Bian Que. Bian Que explained
what had happened and the suit was brought to a close.


Bian Que

This story probably says more about notions of psychology than of
physiology. In fact, much of early Chinese medical theory is based on a
correlation between psychological health and physical health. Much of this
correlation is expressed in terms of qi, a term with a broad range of meanings.
It originally referred to the steam that rises from cooked food (and, indeed,
there has also long been a connection drawn between food and health) or to
the vapor that is visible in the sky. However, within the body, it refers, on the
one hand, to breath, and on the other to energy, both psychic and emotional.
Keeping the qi harmonized was basic to maintaining health. For example,
the Pulling Scripture, found in 1983 in an early Han-dynasty tomb at
Zhangjiashan, Jiangling, Hubei, but certainly deriving from notions of
medicine current during the time of Bian Que, states:

The reason that noblemen become ill is that their joy and anger are not
harmonized. When they are joyful, their yang qi is plentiful; when they
are angry, their yin qi is plentiful. This is why those who cultivate
themselves quickly inhale when they are pleased, and suddenly exhale
when they are angry in order to harmonize them. By sucking in the
essence and vapor of heaven and earth, they can solidify their yin, and
therefore can be without illness.

Similarly, the Inner Patrimony chapter of the Guanzi, a kind of meditation
manual that dates to the Warring States period, also advises the need for the
emotions and the qi to be settled.

Settle the heart within: the ears and eyes will be acute and perceptive,
and the four limbs will be sturdy. They will be the abode of the seminal
essence. Semen is the coagulation of qi.

Probably the most famous story about Bian Que concerns his visitations
with Duke Huan of Tian Qi (r. –; not to be confused with the earlier
Duke Huan of Jiang Qi [r. –]). Employed as court physician, Bian Que
told the duke that he had a disease just under the skin that, if not treated
promptly, would surely become more serious; the duke dismissed this
diagnosis, saying that he was perfectly healthy, and suspecting that Bian Que
was inventing this illness as a way of earning prot from it. Five days later, Bian
Que informed him that the disease had progressed to his circulatory system;
again the duke rejected the diagnosis. Five days later, Bian Que said that the
disease had reached the digestive tract, but again the duke rejected this. Five

Biographies

days later still, Bian Que examined the duke, but withdrew without a word. The
duke sent someone to ask why he now had no diagnosis. Bian Que responded:

When an illness resides just under the skin, it can be reached with
warm presses; when it is in the blood system, acupuncture needles can
reach it; when it is in the intestines, medicines can reach it; but when
it is in the bone marrow, even the God of Fate can do nothing about it.
Now, your illness is in the bone marrow; that is why I did not seek to
treat it.

As the story goes, ve days later, Duke Huan became ill. He sent someone to
summon Bian Que, but Bian Que had already left the state, and Duke Huan
died. This is usually understood as speaking to the need for early treatment
and preventive medicine. However, in another story, not included in his
biography, Bian Que claims that it was his older brothers who were truly
skilled in this art, not he. The book Pheasant-Cap Master recounts that Bian
Que had audience with Lord Wen of Wei (r. –), who asked him which
of the three brothers in his family was the best doctor. Bian Que responded:
My oldest brother is the best, the middle brother next, while I am the least.
When Lord Wen pressed him on this, Bian Que explained:

My eldest brother can see the spirit; before an illness has formed, he
gets rid of it. Thus, his fame has never gone beyond the family. My
middle brother cures the illness when it is visible on the surface. Thus,
his fame has not gone beyond the village. As for me, when it is in the
blood system, I use medicines or cut beneath the skin, and for that I
have become famous among the many lords.

In fact, Bian Que did become famous among the many lords, his name
now synonymous with medicine. Even today, the highest compliment that
can be paid to a Chinese doctor is to call him a living Bian Que.