CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF JIN

There is a story told about the young King Cheng of Zhou (r. 1042/1035–
1006) toward the beginning of his reign when he was still a young boy:
playing with his younger brother Shu Yu (Shu meaning Junior), he told
him that he was awarding him rule of a state. The royal scribe asked on what
day this would happen. The king responded that they were just playing and
that he didnt really mean it. The scribe responded: For the Son of Heaven
there are no playful words. What he says the scribe will write it, the ritual
masters will fulll it, and the musicians will sing of it. With that, Shu Yu was
made to rule the state of Tang, a small area to the east of the Yellow River and
the Fen River in what is today southwestern Shanxi province. This was the
precursor to the state of Jin, which in subsequent centuries would become
the most important state of the Springs and Autumns period. This is clearly
a just-so story, intended to show the gravity of the rulers responsibility and
the probity of the historians work. In fact, it is almost certain that King
Cheng was already an adult when he came to power, and Shu Yu, though
certainly younger, was doubtless also an adult. His appointment to develop a
colony in the Fen River valley was part of the greater Zhou strategy of ruling
the territories that they had just conquered. The Fen River valley was a
strategic location between the Zhou homeland and the former Shang capital
area, and had been the scene of considerable ghting during the reign of
Shang king Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189) and probably also thereafter. It was
important that it be governed by someone trustworthy, and who could be
more trustworthy than a brother.
In the early 1990s, archaeologists from Peking University located a
cemetery in the area, just outside of the city of Houma, Shanxi, that they
identied as containing the tombs of the early lords of Jin. Unfortunately,
tomb robbers found some of the tombs before the archaeologists did. Toward
the end of the decade, the archaeologists believed that they had nished
their work, with seventeen tombs arrayed in two more or less neat rows,
representing eight generations of lords and their wives (one of the lords

Hereditary Houses

tombs was accompanied by tombs of two wives). Unfortunately, in the spring
of 1998, tomb robbers struck again, blasting their way into a tomb that was
located at the far end of the cemetery between the top and bottom rows of
tombs. When the archaeologists nally salvaged what they could of the
tomb, they found that it was the earliest of all tombs in the cemetery. They
found the bottom portion of a square caldron that had otherwise been
obliterated by the dynamite blast. By a stroke of rare luck, it was precisely the
portion of the vessel that carried the inscription. The vessel was made for
Shu Yu.

It was the fourteenth month, the king performed a libation oering,
greatly inscribing a prayer at Cheng Zhou. Completing the prayer, the
king called out to convene his sires, and awarded Shu Yu with a skirt
and jacket, chariot and horses, and thirty double-strands of cowries,
(for which Shu Yu) dares to respond to the kings benecence, herewith
making (this) treasured oertory vessel; may for ten thousand years it
extol the kings making radiant his sire.

This matches to some extent a record in the Zuo Tradition, recounting the
award made to Shu Yu to be the rst lord of Jin. However, despite being
the founder of the state, it was not Shu Yu, but rather his son Xie who moved
the administrative seat to Jin. This move too has now been corroborated by
a recently unearthed bronze vessel. Unfortunately, this vessel too was
unearthed by tomb robbers, and purchased in 2005 by the National Museum
of China on the antique market in Hong Kong. The inscription uses a style
of date-notation that had been in use in the earlier Shang dynasty, referring
to a king commanding a Bo (Bo meaning Senior or First Born) of Tang
to be lord in Jin. Since Shu Yu was not rst born, this Bo of Tang must be
his son; the twenty-eighth year must refer to later in the reign of King
Cheng, probably 1008.

Yao Gong makes for his wife Yao this gui-tureen, meeting with the
kings commanding Tang Bo to be lord in Jin. It is the kings twenty-
eighth year.

These recent discoveries do not add much to what is known of the rst
years of the state of Jin, but they do show something about the role of
archaeology—and, unfortunately, of tomb robbers—in unearthing some of
the material remains of that early history. Indeed, the excavations at the


Jin

Houma cemetery provide almost the only information about the early lords
of the state; the Hereditary House of Jin chapter of Records of the Historian
does no more than note the names of Xie and the next four rulers of the
state.
It would not be until late in the Western Zhou period that Jin would
become involved in Zhou politics, rst perhaps inadvertently, and then more
deliberately. In , King Li of Zhou (r. /–/) was forced to ee
into exile. The place he went, Zhi, along the Fen River in Shanxi province,
was either within or very near to Jin territory; whether he went there with
the active support of Jin or not cannot now be known. However, after this
time Jin comes to be mentioned more and more for its support of the Zhou
kings. In the thirty-third year of the reign of King Xuan of Zhou (r. –
), the Jin lord Su (also known as Lord Xian) accompanied the king on a
lengthy campaign far to the east, in present-day Shandong province.
Afterward, he was given awards at the Zhou eastern capital at Luoyang, a
campaign and awards that he would commemorate on a rack of bells: the Jin
Hou Su bianzhong. About this time, Jin also fought several battles to the
north of its state seeking to defend against Warrior attacks into the Zhou
heartland. These succeeded in buying only a few years. In , the nal
Western Zhou king, King You (r. –) was killed and the capital was
sacked. King Yous court had been riven by factionalism, with Jin arrayed
against Guo, its neighbor on the southern side of the Yellow River, and
Zheng, which was just then relocating to the east of Guo. There was a period
of about twenty years when there were two claimants to the Zhou kingship,
and no king residing in either of the two capitals; King Yous younger brother
Yu Chen claimed to rule at Guo, while King Yous son by his original queen
Yi Jiu sought refuge among his maternal relatives. Finally, in , Chou, Lord
Wen of Jin (r. –) killed Yu Chen at Guo and then escorted Yi Jiu to the
Zhou eastern capital at Luoyang, where he would reign for another thirty
years as King Ping (r. –). Lord Wen was also celebrated with a
ceremony at the capital, being awarded a command the text of which was
preserved as one of the chapters of the Exalted Scriptures.
Unfortunately for Jin, when Lord Wen died, it too broke into factions.
Lord Wen was succeeded by his son, Lord Zhao (r. –), who ruled at
the Jin capital Yi. Lord Wens younger brother, Cheng Shi was given the city
of Quwo, where he reigned over a separate polity, posthumously known as
Huan Shu (r. –). When Lord Zhao was assassinated in , Huan Shu
attempted to enter the capital to take control of the entire state, but the
people of the capital area revolted against him, and he was forced to withdraw

Hereditary Houses

again to Quwo. The main-line lords (hou) of the state and the Quwo branch
of the family continued to contend for power for the next several decades,
with the two factions repeatedly attacking each other. In , Cheng Shis son
Zhuang Bo (r. –) succeeded to power in Quwo. In , he himself
stabbed the ruler of the capital, Lord Xiao (r. –), to death, and again
attempted to take control there, but he too was rebued. With the succession
of Duke Wu in Quwo (r. –/), the tide began to shift decisively in
favor of the Quwo rulers. In , Duke Wu nally succeeded in taking the
capital and killing the last of the direct line rulers, Duke Min (r. –).
Duke Wu took the plunder from the city and presented it to the Zhou king,
King Xi (r. –). In return, King Xi recognized Duke Wu—and thus the
Quwo lineage—as the legitimate rulers of Jin. This would not be the end of
civil wars in Jin, by any stretch, but at least it resolved this rst conict.
Indeed, similar problems would begin with the reign of Duke Wus son,
Duke Xian (r. –). It involves many personal names, the relationships
among which need to be kept straight. The names make it dicult to follow,
but the plot is easy: male lust, female ambition, and fraternal conict, though
virtue wins out in the end.
In the fth year of his reign, , Duke Xian launched an attack against
the northern Li Warriors, in the course of which he captured one of their
women: Li Ji, making her one of his consorts. A few years later, he moved
against the Jin nobility, killing many of them, with others eeing into
exile in Jins former nemesis Guo. He himself constructed a new capital at
Jiang, where a few years later still, Li Ji gave birth to a son, Xiqi. Duke
Xian had already sired three sons, the mother of the eldest of them,
Shensheng, was a daughter of the premier among the rulers of the
independent states: Duke Huan of Qi (r. –); the other two sons,
Chonger, and Yiwu, were born of two dierent women from another
barbarian state of the north: the Di (Distant Ones). To make room for Xiqi,
the duke sent these three sons to live in three separate cities of the state. Over
the next several years Li Ji publicly praised Shensheng, but privately slandered
him to the dukes most inuential advisors, Li Ke and Xun Xi, seeking to
have her own son named the prince-in-waiting. Shensheng nally resolved
the problem by committing suicide. With this, the two younger brothers,
Chonger and Yiwu, realizing that they would be the next targets of Li Jis
machinations, fortied the cities in which they were living. This angered
their father Duke Xian, who attacked both cities. Chonger ed in exile to the
Di, while Yiwu initially successfully resisted the attack, but eventually was
also forced into exile.


Jin

Chongers exile, which lasted nineteen years, is one of the great stories of
Chinese history. It took him through most of the independent states of the
time, rst in north China, then to Chu in the south, and nally to Qin in the
west. Almost everywhere he went he and his band of supporters impressed
their hosts with their abilities. The supporters included men from the Zhao
and Wei lineages, which, together with another lineage—the Han—would
eventually divide Jin into three separate states. But that would not happen
for another two hundred years. In the meantime, much would take place
within the ducal house in Jin.
In , Duke Xian died, in the ninth month of the year. Li Ji immediately
enlisted the aid of Xun Xi in naming Xiqi to be the next duke. However,
before this could take place, another minister, Li Ke, killed Xiqi. Xun Xi then
named another young son of Duke Xian, Zhuozi, who was a son of Li Jis
younger sister and who was still a toddler, to be duke, with himself as regent.
Li Ke again inserted himself, killing both Zhuozi and Li Ji. He allowed Xun
Xi to commit suicide. Li Ke, now in a position to name the next duke, invited
Chonger to return from exile; Chonger declined to do so. Li Ke then invited
Yiwu to do so, which he accepted, being known posthumously as Duke Hui
of Jin (r. –). His reign would be characterized throughout by the
intrigue and duplicity with which it began.
Duke Huis rst command was that Li Ke, his ostensible patron, commit
suicide, which he did. Four years later, he managed to so oend Duke Mu of
Qin (r. –), who was married to his sister, that Qin invaded Jin and
took Duke Hui prisoner. At the urging of his wife, Duke Mu spared Duke
Huis life, allowing him to return to Jin. Once returned to power, hearing that
ministers wished to replace him with his older brother Chonger, he sent
assassins to the Di to try to kill Chonger. The assassins were not successful.
In the meantime, Duke Hui sent his son, Yu, to Qin as a hostage, intended to
guarantee that he would not again deceive Duke Mu of Qin. Duke Mu again
treated him generously, giving him one of his daughters in marriage.
However, in , hearing that his father Duke Hui was ill and dying, Yu
secretly escaped from Qin to return to Jin; his wife, the daughter of Duke
Mu of Qin, refused to accompany him. Duke Hui died in the next year, and
Yu became duke of Jin, known posthumously as Duke Huai (r. ). His
reign did not last long. Duke Mu of Qin, outraged that he would escape from
his hostage situation, and especially that he would leave his wife behind,
invited Chonger to Qin, giving him in marriage the same daughter as well as
four other daughters. With the support of the Qin army, Chonger crossed
the Yellow River, nally returning to Jin territory. He met the Jin army of

Hereditary Houses

Duke Huai at Gaoliang, and defeated them in battle, killing Duke Huai,
whose reign lasted only a few months.
With that, Chongers nineteen-year exile had come to an end, and at
sixty-two years of age he nally took his place as duke of Jin, to be known
posthumously as Duke Wen (r. –). He moved immediately to
reorganize the Jin government and especially its depleted military, forming
it into three armies, each division of which was led by the senior members of
the six major lineages of the state. In addition to strengthening Jins own
military strength, Duke Wen also drew on the relationships he had developed
during his exile to forge alliances with other states. What is more, in the
second year of his reign, he came to the rescue of the Zhou king, King Xiang
(r. –), who had been driven out of the capital by his own brother.
Duke Wen led a group of states to return the king to the capital. Needless to
say, this put the Zhou king very much in his debt.
Over the preceding two decades, the southern state of Chu had taken
advantage of the death of Duke Huan of Qi and the chaos in Jin to expand
toward the north. In , it attempted to extend this expansion still further,
invading the state of Song, an ally of Jin. Duke Wen reconstituted his
coalition to come to the aid of Song. In the next year, the Jin coalition, with
forces of Qi and Qin serving as the principal support of all three armies of
the reconstituted Jin military, decisively defeated the Chu army and its allies
at the battle of Chengpu, somewhere near where the present-day provinces
of Henan and Shandong meet. The battle, which took place on the fourth day
of the fourth month of , the day jisi of the cycle of sixty days, is often said
to have been the most important battle of the Springs and Autumns period;
it is certainly the battle most fully described in the Zuo Tradition, including
both the pre-battle preparations and also the tactics employed by both sides.
With its army defeated and its alliances shattered, Chu withdrew to its
Yangzi River homeland and did not again threaten the northern states for
several generations. The following month, Duke Wen hosted King Xiang of
Zhou at a place called Jiantu, and presented him with the Chu captives: one
hundred chariots and one thousand foot-soldiers. The king awarded Duke
Wen a grand chariot, a red bow and red arrows, a black bow and ,
black arrows, sweet-wine, a ladle, and bodyguards; these gifts are very
much like the gifts recounted in bronze inscriptions from the period. More
important, the king appointed Duke Wen as the premier among the leaders
of all the states.
Already aged when he came to power, Duke Wen reigned for only another
four years after being named premier. However, this was a status that the


Jin

rulers of Jin would maintain for almost a century to follow. The history of
the state through Duke Ding (r. –) saw ups and downs, but in general
proceeded smoothly. Beginning with the following reign, that of Duke Chu
(r. –/), Jins rulers would confront one crisis after another that
would eventually cause the state to break apart.
Despite Duke Wens great accomplishments, his reorganization of the Jin
government and military would come back to haunt Jin almost two centuries
later. Duke Wen drew upon leading members of dierent Jin lineages, most
of them people who had followed him throughout his exile, and rewarded
them with their own territorial power bases. Six of these lineages—Wei,
Zhao, Han, Xun, Zhonghang, and Fan—would develop into independent
powers in their own right. By the fth century, in a pattern reminiscent of
the independent states vis--vis the Zhou king, these six lineages had become
more powerful than the Jin rulers. In , Zhibo, the leader of the Xun
lineage and the most powerful gure in the state at the time, joined forces
with the Wei, Zhao and Han lineages to divide up the territories of the other
two: Zhonghang and Fan. With this, Duke Chu, fearing that Zhibo would
next move on him, ed in exile to Qi, the long-time ally of the Jin rulers.
Meanwhile, Jin devolved into civil war. There is some evidence that there
were two people each claiming to be Duke Chus successor, such that there
may have been three dierent reign years simultaneously in use. This has
caused the traditional histories not only to confuse the chronology of the
period, but even who was ruling—or trying to rule—the state. What is clear
is that in , Wei, Zhao and Han turned on Zhibo and killed him, dividing
the territory of his own Xun lineage among themselves. This act—and thus
this year—is often regarded as the beginning of the Warring States period.
For Jin, it was the beginning of the end. The state survived through four
more dukes, but just barely. Indeed, one of them, Duke You (r. –) was
stabbed to death by his own wife while he tried to rape her. Finally, in ,
the three surviving lineages—Wei, Zhao and Han—divided the state among
them. They would all be major powers of the Warring States period, each
writing its own chapter among the hereditary houses of the period.