CHAPTER 58
BIOGRAPHIES OF HAN FEI AND LI SI

Han Fei, better known as Han Feizi (c. 280–233), was a nobleman of the state
of Han, one of the three states into which the great state of Jin divided in 403.
Although his date of birth is unknown, it is known that he lived during the
reigns of Kings Huanhui (r. 272–239) and An (r. 238–230) of Han, and it is
usually thought that he was born about 280. Very little is known about his early
life, other than that he spent some period of time studying with the Confucian
philosopher Xunzi (c. 316–217). This may have been when Xunzi was in
residence at the Jixia Academy in Qi, sometime during the reign of King Xiang
of Qi (r. 283–265), or more likely from when Xunzi was magistrate of Lanling,
a town in the southern part of modern-day Shandong province. One of his
classmates at this time was Li Si (280–208), a person with whom he would
reconnect at the end of his life, with very tragic consequences for himself.
Han Fei’s native state was located all around the Zhou capital at Luoyang,
extending from the southern part of modern Shanxi province through the
central part of Henan. In his own day, the state was sandwiched between the
larger and more powerful states of Qin and Wei. On the one hand, it was able
to leverage these two states against each other to defend itself, but its survival
was always precarious. As a nobleman of Han, Han Fei had a natural incentive
to think about ways to administer the state such that it could survive.
One thing that is known about Han Fei is that he had a speech impediment,
and so preferred to put his thoughts into writing that could speak for him.
Some of these writings were apparently done when he was living in Han,
since they use honoriﬁc language to refer to the rulers there. At least one
other, called “Preserve Han,” was certainly written in the last year of his life,
from 234 to 233. In 234, Qin invaded Han and was on the verge of annihilating
it. King An sent Han Fei to Qin as a sort of ambassador for his home state to
persuade King Zheng of Qin, the future First Emperor (Qin Shi Huangdi;
r. 246/221–210), to break oﬀ the invasion. Han Fei’s writings had apparently
already circulated as far as Qin, for King Zheng is said to have been a fan of

Biographies

them, and so was delighted ﬁnally to meet the writer. According to Han Fei’s
biography in Records of the Historian, after reading two of these writings,
“Solitary Indignation” and “Five Vermin,” King Zheng said: “Oh my, if I could
get to see this man and have a walk with him, even death would not be
detestable.”108 Unfortunately, death would come to Han Fei and not to King
Zheng. At this time, Han Fei’s erstwhile classmate Li Si was one of King
Zheng’s principal advisers. He convinced the king that Han Fei would
naturally put the interests of Han before those of Qin, and so was a danger
to Qin. With this, Han Fei was imprisoned. Li Si then supplied him with
poison, ostensibly so that he could avoid any mutilating punishments. Han
Fei drank the poison and died in 233.
In his relatively short life, Han Fei produced a great number of writings.
The book known as the Han Feizi includes ﬁfty-ﬁve chapters, and is one of
the most extensive philosophical works of the pre-Qin period. Han Fei had
studied with the Confucian philosopher Xunzi and had certainly adopted
some of his views, especially the notions that the human condition was
naturally warped, but also that it was possible to straighten it and to make
people into productive citizens. However, whereas Xunzi had emphasized
the role of ancient precedents—education and ritual, Han Fei espoused the
role of governmental techniques, the main ides of which he adopted from
earlier writings generally termed “Legalist”: the Book of the Lord Shang
attributed to Shang Yang (d. 338) of the state of Wei and the Shenzi of Shen
Buhai (d. 337) of Han Fei’s own state of Han. These books took as their
central theme the exercise of government through explicit laws (fa) and
techniques (shu), and advocated in particular that agriculture and the
military were the main pillars of the state. The concept of fa, usually
translated as “law” and thus giving this school of thought its name, “Legalism”
(Fa jia), was based upon systematic policies set in writing and promulgated
throughout the state. In theory, once set in place, these laws would be selfgoverning, with no further need for the intervention of the ruler; everyone
would know what was expected of him or her, and would know the
consequences—also made explicit—of not conforming to those expectations.
As put into practice in the state of Qin—and then inherited by the Han
dynasty (202 BCE–220 CE) and most subsequent Chinese governments,
this entailed a massive bureaucracy, with a corps of functionaries copying
and recopying government edicts, and ensuring that they were made
available throughout the state—and later throughout the empire.
Although Han Fei and his Han Feizi are regarded as the most thorough
exponents of Legalism, he was rather syncretic in his thinking. Not only did he


Han Fei and Li Si

absorb many of his ideas from Xunzi, such as the view that human nature is
inherently evil, but he also adapted ideas from Daoism, especially that the ruler
should be all-powerful but also invisible to both the government functionaries
and also the people, not dirtying himself with the functioning of the
government. The chapter of the book entitled “The Way of the Ruler” begins:
The Way is the beginning of the ten thousand things, the main-line of
right and wrong. This is why the enlightened lord holds to the
beginning to know the origin of the ten thousand things and controls
the main-line to know the ends of skill and defeat. Therefore, in empty
and quiet he awaits edicts, their wording and action being clear and
deﬁnite: empty, he knows the natural state of things; quiet, he knows
the uprightness of movement. Those who speak set the terms, those
who act set the forms, the forms and terms matching each other, the
lord is then without any action and everything returns to its natural
state. Thus, it is said: The lord does not make visible his own desires,
for if he does, his ministers and generals will adapt to them; the lord
does not make visible his ideas, for if he does, his ministers and
generals will contort themselves. Thus, it is said: Get rid of love
and hate, and the ministers will be pure; get rid of the old and wisdom,
and the ministers will be complete of themselves. Therefore, being
wise but uncalculating will cause the ten thousand things to know
their places; acting but not through the worthy, you will see what those
below the ministers rely upon; being courageous but not with anger,
will cause the ministers to exert themselves in war. This is why by
getting rid of wisdom there will be enlightenment; getting rid of
worth, there will be success; getting rid of courage, there will be
strength. The many ministers will hold to their jobs and the hundred
oﬃcers will be constant, working on the basis of their abilities. This is
what is called “practicing constancy.” Thus it is said: Still, there is no
place that he is located; limpid, no one can ﬁnd his place. The
enlightened lord is non-acting above, and the many ministers tremble
with fear below. The way of the enlightened lord is to cause the wise to
exhaust their calculations, on which the lord decides aﬀairs; therefore,
the lord never lacks wisdom. It is to cause the worthy to display their
talents, which the lords takes advantage of; therefore, the lord never
lacks ability. When successful, the lord has the worth; when mistaken,
the ministers shoulder the guilt. Therefore, the lord never lacks fame.
This is why those who take not being worthy as worth are the masters

Biographies

and why those who take not being wise as wise are the governors. The
ministers do all the work, and the lord gets the credit. This is the
maxim of the worthy ruler.109
This may seem cynical, but it established the foundation of a political
philosophy that would persist for at least two thousand years, and which
may still exist today.
Whereas Han Fei was the political scientist responsible for the consolidation
of Legalism, his one-time classmate Li Si was the consummate politician
responsible for its implementation. Like Han Fei, he was probably born about
280, but unlike Han Fei, was not a nobleman; rather, he was born in a village
in the southern state of Chu. Little is known of Li Si’s early years, other than
that he served as a petty clerk in his hometown and that he and Han Fei both
studied under Xunzi. It becomes possible to trace his career development only
beginning in 247, when he arrived in Qin to serve under Lü Buwei (291–235),
Grand Chancellor under King Zhuangxiang of Qin (r. 250–247). King
Zhuangxiang died in this year, and was succeeded by his son Zheng, with
whom Li Si had an interview and was made a senior scribe. Ten years later, Lü
Buwei was ﬁrst forced into exile and then, in 235, forced to commit suicide;
sometime thereafter Li Si became Minister of Justice. In 235 or 234, Han Fei
had gone to Qin to save his native state of Han from being invaded. Li Si went
in the opposite direction, from Qin to Han, trying to persuade King An of Han
to go to Qin himself to sue for peace. When Li Si returned to Qin, he was
responsible for Han Fei’s imprisonment and suicide.
During the decade of the 220s, Qin undertook the annihilation of all of
the other states, beginning with Han, in 230, and ending with the northeastern
state of Qi in 221. With the uniﬁcation complete, King Zheng gave himself
the new title of First Emperor of Qin. His most important ministers
recommended that he appoint his relatives to rule over the conquered lands,
as had been done by the founders of the preceding Zhou dynasty. Li Si is said
to have argued against this precedent, noting that this had eventually given
rise to the independent states that Qin had just defeated. It would be better
to subject all to rule from the central authority. The First Emperor agreed
with Li Si, and ordered that the administrative structure of Qin be extended
throughout the empire. Sometime after this, Li Si was promoted to the rank
of Grand Chancellor, the highest rank in the government.
In 213, Li Si once again gave advice to the First Emperor, the advice for
which he is best known—and most often castigated—in Chinese history. At
a kind of conference attended by the many scholars at court and presided


Han Fei and Li Si

over by the emperor himself, Li Si urged the emperor not to look to the past
for his model of government, a time that had devolved into constant warfare,
but rather to bring about a uniﬁcation of ideas, just as he had united the
various states. He then went on to propose the burning of all books except
those from the state of Qin itself and those technical manuals that could be
useful, and the execution of all scholars who “use the past to negate the
present.” This proposal is quoted in the “Annals of the First Emperor” in
Records of the Historian.
In the past, all under heaven was in disorder, and no one was able to unite
it. This is why the many lords acted in unison, all talking about the past
to harm the present, decorating their empty sayings to disorder reality.
People excelled at their private studies to negate what their superiors had
established. Now, your majesty has united all under heaven, has
diﬀerentiated white from black and settled a single order, and yet those
private scholars join together to negate the teaching of the law. When
people hear edicts, they all debate them on the basis of their own ideas, at
court silently disagreeing, while in the streets they disagree openly,
becoming famous for disagreeing with the ruler, getting promoted for
weird notions, and leading the lower people to create slander. If this is not
prohibited, then above the ruler’s power will decline and below partisan
groups will form. It is best that these be prohibited.
I propose that everything in the secretarial oﬃce other than the
Qin annals should be burned. Anyone in the world not employed in
the Oﬃce of Broad Learning who possesses poetry, scriptures, or the
sayings of the Hundred Schools should submit them all to conﬁscation,
so that the deputies will burn them. Anyone who dares to talk about
the poetry or the scriptures should be exposed in the marketplace, and
those who use the past to negate the present should be put to death
with all their family. Oﬃcials who see or know of these and do not
report them should share the same crime. It should be decreed that if
within thirty days the writings have not been burned, those with them
should be branded and made into wall pounders. Those writings not
to be gotten rid of are books of medicine, divination and agriculture.
If there are those who wish to study, they should take the oﬃcials as
their teachers.110
Ironically, at the same time that Li Si is infamous for the destruction of
literature, he is also credited with the authorship of a book that contributed

Biographies

greatly to the uniﬁcation of the Chinese script. This was called the Fascicle of
Cangjie, Cangjie being the name of the legendary ﬁgure said to have invented
writing after viewing the tracks left by birds and animals. The Fascicle of
Cangjie was quite short, just seven chapters of sixty characters each, arranged
as rhyming four-character phrases. This was designed to teach scribes how
to write 420 of the most frequently appearing characters. By the Han dynasty,
it had been expanded to include ﬁfty-ﬁve paragraphs of sixty characters
each, for a total of 3,300 diﬀerent characters. Based on the numerous
examples of the text that have been unearthed in recent decades, it does
seem that it was a standard primer for scribes.
The last years of Li Si’s life were not such to bring any further credit to his
name. In 210, he was together with the First Emperor on a tour of the eastern
territories when the emperor died. Together with the eunuch Zhao Gao
(258–207), he forged a last will and testament of the First Emperor, naming
Huhai (229–207), a younger son of the emperor, to succeed him, to be known
as the Second Emperor of Qin (r. 209–207). This precipitated great unrest
among the people at large, as well as intrigues at court, where Zhao Gao
came to hold preeminent power, if only very brieﬂy. Perhaps in an attempt to
salvage something of Li Si’s reputation, Sima Qian says in his biography that
Li Si remonstrated against the excesses of the Second Emperor, for which
reason Zhao Gao had him imprisoned and put to death in the grisliest of
manners. In the seventh month of the second year of the Second Emperor
(208), Li Si underwent the “ﬁve punishments” (branding, cutting oﬀ of the
nose, cutting oﬀ one leg at the knee, castration, and execution), the latter of
which was carried out by cutting him in two at the waist in the marketplace
of the capital Xianyang. His family was then exterminated to the third
degree.


