CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF SHAO TUO

Shao Tuo (d. ), was an important court ocer in the state of Chu, bearing
the title Lieutenant. During his life he was responsible for economic and
judicial aairs of the Chu capital area, creating quite a number of written
records concerning the civil administration and court cases over which he
presided. There are also records of divinations and prayers concerning his
personal life. However, neither he nor any of these records were ever
mentioned in any of ancient Chinas traditional literature. Were it not for the
discovery of his tomb in the winter of 1986–1987, Shao Tuo would have
remained totally unknown to history. The tomb was discovered in a cemetery
at Baoshan, Jingmen, Hubei, just outside of the site of Ying, the capital of
Chu. Fortunately, it was excavated by archaeologists prior to the great spate
of tomb robbing that has cursed China since the 1990s. Thus, the tomb was
preserved intact; in addition to a full inventory of grave goods, the tomb also
included the rst signicant discovery of bamboo-strip documents dating
to the Warring States period. It was these documents, taken to the grave with
Shao Tuo, that documented his life.
Shao Tuo was a descendant of King Zhao of Chu (r. –) and so was
a nobleman of that state. His tomb was certainly tting for someone of noble
heritage. Situated in the middle of the Baoshan cemetery, it was anked on
either side by the tombs of his wife and certain male relatives. His body was
wrapped in three layers of ne clothing, and then placed inside three nested
cons, ornamented with interlaced dragons and each draped in silks. These
cons were placed in turn inside two outer cons, essentially a subterranean
house. The tomb was divided into four compartments or chambers, one
for each of the four cardinal directions. This outer con was covered in six
layers of dierent-colored clay, while under the cons was a pit with a
sacriced goat; this doubtless was intended to ensure good luck for the
burial, the word for goat, yang, being close in sound with the word auspicious
(xiang), and being part of the character used to write that word.

Biographies

Even more impressive than the tomb itself were the lavish grave goods
found inside it. There were dierent sorts of goods in each of the four
compartments that surrounded the cons. The eastern compartment, above
where the head of Shao Tuo was located, was the Dining Room, holding
sacricial food oerings packed in baskets; although most of the foods had
decomposed, an inventory written on bamboo strips that was placed in the
tomb records at least the following foods: water chestnuts, chestnuts, dates,
pears, persimmons, ginger, lotus root, onions, pepper seeds. There were also
meats: chicken and pork, as well as a whole ox that had been cut into pieces.
In addition to these foodstus, there were a great many bronze sacricial
vessels, including eighteen bronze caldrons, as well as actual musical
instruments. Also found in this compartment were wooden gurines
symbolizing servants and perhaps also the musicians to play the instruments.
Moving clockwise around the tomb, the southern compartment was the
armory, lled with numerous weapons and pieces of a chariot that had been
dismantled. The western compartment had items for daily use, including
furniture, clothing, tools, and blank bamboo strips. Finally, the northern
compartment seems to have been intended to serve as Shao Tuos oce. It had
all of the accouterments necessary for his professional life: a writing table, a
writing brush, and a scholars knife used to correct writing mistakes (by
paring o the top layer of a strip of bamboo). There was also a bronze lamp,
combs, and personal ornaments, as well as two wooden gurines, presumably
representing his ocial servants. Most important for historians, it was in this
chamber that bamboo strips documenting Shao Tuos life were found.
of these strips record ocial business over which he presided, including
especially law cases, and thus provide rare information about the history of
law in ancient China. However, there is also a considerable corpus, fty-three
strips, that record divinations that were performed and prayers that were
oered on behalf of Shao Tuo during the last years of his life. Most of these
divinations used turtle shells, though some of them used a method of milfoil
divination more or less similar to that of the Classic of Changes. These are of
particular interest to scholars of Chinese religion and philosophy.
The documents buried together with Shao Tuo provide the only
information concerning his life. The documents concerning his ocial
duties make up the bulk of the bamboo strips buried in the northern
chamber of the tomb. These are divided into four dierent named categories:
Collected Registries, Suits Based on Collected Registries, Assigned Dates,
and Minutes of Court Cases; there are also a number of records without a
named topic. The rst two named categories concern the population records


Shao Tuo

for which Shao Tuo, as a civil administrator, was responsible; all inhabitants
of the region regardless of social rank were required to be registered,
presumably for tax and corvee labor obligations. The Assigned Dates
category provides detailed diary entries for where and when court cases
were handled, and who was responsible for them; these mention in passing
some aspects of these cases: police investigations, lings of reports, and
records of nes paid.
Interesting as the rst three categories of records are, it is the fourth
category, Minutes of Court Cases, that provides the most information about
Chu criminal justice and Shao Tuos responsibilities in it. Some of these
involve cases between two dierent parties of the populace, others complaints
against the government (for unfair taxation, for instance). One of the
simplest records reads:

Jing De brought suit against Gong Qiu and Gong You, men of the
southern district of Fan Mound, saying that they had killed his elder
brother. On jiachen (day ) of the ninth month, Yuan Xiu and Xin
Yin, the minor detectives of Fan Mound returned the investigation,
which said: The southern district of Fan Mound really did have a Gong
You, but in the year that Gangu You became an ocer in Xi, and now
lives in . . . district, except that Fanchang does not have a Gong Qiu.
Secretary Qi recorded it, Dan Shang was witness.

Although unusually for these ocial documents, this one does not begin
with a formal date, it does include basic information: the name of the
plaintive, the names and hometowns of the defendants, the report of the
investigation, and the names of the ocers who recorded and witnessed
the report. Unfortunately, it does not tell us what role Shao Tuo played, but
presumably he was in charge of adjudicating the case.
There is a smaller, but by no means insubstantial, number of strips that
record divinations performed on behalf of Shao Tuo. These are of two types:
more or less pro forma divinations praying for the success of his ocial
service, and divinations, largely done over the last three years of his life,
concerning his health. They begin with a date, noted as some great event in
the history of the state (as if an American record were to say In the year that
Neil Armstrong walked on the moon [i.e., 1969] or In the year that President
Nixon visited China [i.e., 1972]). The dates show that the divinations about
Shao Tuos health became increasingly urgent in the last year of his life, when
it was clear that he was dying. Almost all of these divinations involved two

Biographies

stages: an initial stage announcing the topic, the prognostication of which
usually indicated some problem needing propitiation, and then a record of
oerings to various spirits, and a further prognostication, suggesting that the
propitiation had been successful. The following record is one such example.

In the year that the Song emissary Sheng Gong Bian visited Chu (i.e.,
), on the yiwei day of the Jingyi month (rst month of summer),
Shi Beishang used the Instructing Turtle to arm on behalf of Shao
Yin Tuo: From the Jingyi month until the next Jingyi month,
throughout the entire year, would that his person have no trouble.
Prognosticating it: The long-term armation is auspicious, but there
is a little external concern, and the intention and the aair will be
obtained a little slowly. For this reason they exorcised it, praying to
King Zhao with a specially-raised ox, and oering it; praying to
Wenping Yejun, Wu Gongzi Chun, Marshall Ziyin, and Cai Gongzi
Jia, each with a specially-raised piglet and wine and food; and praying
to the wife with a specially-raised pig: If the intention and the aair
are quickly gotten, all will be quickly reciprocated. Prognosticating it:
Auspicious. Oering in the Xiayi month there will be joy.

The divinations about Shao Tuos health follow the same general format. The
rst of the following two examples was apparently performed using a sort of
sortilege divination, of the kind known from the Classic Changes tradition.
The result was announced as two sets of six numbers, akin to the hexagrams
of the Classic Changes.

In the year that the Great Marshall Dao Hua led the army of Chu to
relieve Fu (i.e., ), on the day jimao day of the Jingyi month (rst
month of summer), Chen Yi used Proered Command to arm on
behalf of Commander of the Left Tuo: Having had a sick stomach and
heart, with breath rising and lack of appetite, would that it quickly
improve and that there not be any hex. ----- -----
Prognosticating it: The long-term armation is auspicious, but the
sickness has changed for the worse, there is a continuation and it will
be slow to improve. For this reason they exorcised it, oering prayer
to the Five Mountains: each one sheep; oering prayer to King Zhao: a
specially-raised ox, presenting it; oering prayer to Wenping Xia Junzi
Liang, to Wu Gongzi Chun, to Marshall Ziyin and to Caigong Zijia:
each one specially-raised pig, presenting them. May it attack and


Shao Tuo

dispel with respect to the ancestors and those who have died in battle.
Transferring Yan Jis exorcism, making oering at the High Mound
and Lower Mound of the structure: each one whole pig. Chen Yi
prognosticated it, saying: Auspicious.

The nal example seems to have come just before Shao Tuos death. One
month later, no longer worrying about whether there was a hex or curse on
him, the initial divination simply prays that he not die. The curse is dicult
to understand, but it certainly required propitiation.

In the year that the Great Marshall Dao Hua led the army of Chu to
relieve Fu (i.e., ), on the jihai day of the Xiayi month (the second
month of summer), Guan Yi used Protect the Family (turtle-shell) to
arm on behalf of Commander of the Left Shao Tuo: Given that he
has ulcerous lesions and rising breath, would that he not die. Yi
prognosticated it: The long-term armation is auspicious, he will not
die. There is a curse, visible in Continue Without Heirs and Gradual
Tree Planting; for this reason dispel it. They oered to each of
Continue Without Heirs a fattened pig, presenting them, and
commanded to attack and dispel it with respect to Gradual Tree
Planting; suppress the tail of its place and stop it; would that it be
auspicious. Yi prognosticated it and said: Auspicious. I do not know
the name of its region.

Even though the second-stage prognostication was optimistic, the lack of
any further divinations on his behalf suggests that Shao Tuo did in fact die
shortly after this day.
Although Shao Tuo has been unknown throughout Chinas long history,
it seems proper given both what he did in life and also based on what his
family provided for him in death that his biography, sketchy as it necessarily
is, be included in this brief history of ancient China. It tells us much about
the administration of justice in Chu and about the practice of divination,
and even something about notions of medicine at the time.