CHAPTER
BASIC ANNALS OF XIA

Tradition has it that during his own reign, Shun appointed Yu, the person in
charge of the waterways, to take over as de facto ruler. When Shun then died,
Yu attempted to yield power to Shuns son, Shang Jun, returning to his home
in a land called Xia. However, expressing their dissatisfaction with Shang
Jun, the various local lords from throughout the realm are said to have
followed Yu and prevailed upon him to take his place in command. He
would be known as the Lord of Xia.
Records of the Historian of Sima Qian contains a genealogy for Yu
indicating that he was a great-great grandson of the Yellow Thearch, a
grandson of Zhuanxu, and a son of Gun. Gun attained notoriety at the time
of Yao for failing to control ood waters that are supposed to have covered
all of what is today central China. Gun attempted to hold back the waters by
building dams and levees. After what we are told was nine years this plan
proved to be unsuccessful and the oodwaters overwhelmed the defenses,
Yaos successor Shun appointed Yu to try in his turn. Unlike Gun, Yus method
was the dredge the rivers, so that the water would ow out to the sea.
Yu, usually referred to with the single adjective great before his name
(usually rendered in English as Yu the Great), is mainly renowned in Chinese
legend for having brought this ood under control. This probably reects a
social memory of a time when north China was warmer and much moister
than it became it later times, and the ood basin of the Yellow River extended
over much of the north China plain. In recent times, there have been attempts
to identify this work with a single great ood, most recently focusing on a ood
that a team of geologists claim to have occurred in 1920 BCE when an
earthquake caused a landslide creating a dam on the upper reaches of the
Yellow River. According to this theory, when the dam burst, it released a
massive wave of water downstream. This suggestion has been met with
suspicion.
The earliest record associating Yu with controlling the waters comes in a
bronze inscription of the rst half of the ninth century BCE, which begins:

Basic Annals

Heaven commanded Yu to spread out the land; pulling down the
mountains and deepening the rivers, he then dierentiated the regions
and established government, sending down a reective virtue on the
people.

With the water under control, Yu is said to have divided the territory of
China into nine dierent regions, establishing as well a transportation
network among them. He then made a grand tour of the entire realm,
dierentiating the regions on the basis of their natural environments and
establishing taxes—termed tribute—according to the produce appropriate
to each. These regions are still used to identify macro-regions of China, seen
for instance in the names of regional cuisines. Yu is supposed to have started
in the north, in what is today Shanxi province, and then proceeded in a more
or less clockwise direction. The names, approximate locations in modern-
day China, and the some of the principal tribute goods are as follows:
Jizhou (Shanxi): leather clothing
Yanzhou (northern Henan, northwestern Shandong): lacquer and silk
Qingzhou (eastern Shandong): salt and sea products
Xuzhou (southern Shandong, Anhui and Jiangsu): paulownia wood,
pearls
Yangzhou (Zhejiang, Fujian and Jiangxi): metal and jade
Jingzhou (Hubei and Hunan): feathers, ivory and hides
Yuzhou (Henan): lacquer and silk
Liangzhou (Sichuan and southern Shaanxi): chime-stones, metal,
bearskins
Yongzhou (central and northern Shaanxi, Gansu and Ningxia): jade
A newly discovered manuscript entitled Rongcheng shi (the name of one of
the putative rulers prior to the time of Yao and Shun) from the Warring
States period, says of Yus rule:

He then made use of what was near at hand to know of that which was
distant, he rejected disputation and practiced simplicity, making use
of what the people wanted to bring together the benets of heaven and
earth. This is why those nearby rejoiced in his rule, while those far


Xia

away came of their own accord. Everyone both within and beyond the
four seas all requested to submit themselves to him.

It is no wonder that Yu came to be seen in all texts of this period as the
progenitor of dynastic rule in China.
While serving as de facto ruler during the last years of Shuns rule, Yu had
been assisted by two men whose virtues would also be praised by the Exalted
Scriptures: Gao Yao and Yi. After the death of Shun, Yu sought to emulate
Shuns example by naming Gao Yao as de facto ruler. Unfortunately, Gao Yao
died before he could do so. When Yu himself was about to die just a few years
later, he recommended that Yi succeed him as ruler. There are dierent
accounts of what happened upon the death of Yu the Great. The orthodox
historical tradition, represented for instance by Records of the Historian,
states that Yi, like Yu before him, voluntarily went into exile so that Yus own
son, Qi, could succeed him. However, an alternative scenario was recorded
in a text known as the Bamboo Annals, which was discovered in a tomb of
the early third century BCE that was robbed in CE. According to this
Bamboo Annals, the death of Yu the Great precipitated a civil war between Qi
and Yi. In a great battle at a place called Gan, Qis forces killed Yi, ensuring
that Qi succeed his father as ruler. Also known as the Lord of Xia, Qi then
succeeded his father, his reign thereafter seen as marking the beginning of
dynastic rule in China.
When Qi died, he was succeeded in turn by his son Tai Kang, and then
after just four years of misrule, by Tai Kangs younger brother Zhong Kang.
Zhong Kangs reign includes what seems to be the earliest dated record in
Chinese history. According to the Punishment of Yin chapter of the Exalted
Scriptures, the brothers Xi and He, who had been appointed by Yao to
maintain the timing of the seasons by observing the stars, had come to
neglect their duties. This text says that sometime during the reign of Zhong
Kang, on the rst day of the last month of autumn, a solar eclipse took the
people by surprise because Xi and He were lost in drunkenness. The Bamboo
Annals provides a precise date for this eclipse: the day gengxu, the forty-
seventh day of the sixty-day cycle used for dates in ancient China, of the
ninth month of the fth year of Zhong Kangs reign, which in the chronology
determined by the early editors of the Bamboo Annals corresponds with
1948 BCE. There was a nearly complete solar eclipse on October , 1876,
that would have been visible from the area the Xia is said to have ruled and
which is consistent with at least the month of both records, if not of the day
of the record in the Bamboo Annals.

Basic Annals

After the reign of Zhong Kang, succession reverted to a father-son
pattern, with only a pair of more or less insignicant exceptions, through
eleven more generations (of thirteen further rulers in all), coming nally to
a ruler named Jie. He would go down in Chinese history as the rst of the
paradigmatic last rulers of dynasties, so evil that both Heaven and the people
turned against them. In the case of Jie, during the second half of his reign, a
new ruler of Xias eastern neighbors, the Shang, came to power; this was
Tang. Not only was he himself renowned for being virtuous, but he was also
advised by a particularly able minister, named Yi Yin. Through a series of
interactions between the Xia and Shang, the Shang nally attacked and
drove Jie into exile bringing the Xia dynasty to an ignominious end,
sometime in the middle of the sixteenth century.
The historicity of the Xia dynasty is one of the most vexed questions in
the study of ancient Chinese history. For scholars in China, not only is the
Xia the rst dynasty in the traditional account of Chinese civilization, but
archaeologists have also uncovered a relatively sophisticated culture located
about where the Xia is supposed to have been located and about the time
that the Xia is supposed to have been there, roughly 1900–1500. This is the
Erlitou Culture centered on the site Yanshi Erlitou, just east of Luoyang in
northwestern Henan province. The Erlitou Culture is sandwiched between
two other cultures: the earlier Longshan Culture, a long-lived Neolithic
culture that extended across the north China plain, and the later Erligang
Culture, the type-site and core area of which was to the east, around the
modern city of Zhengzhou in northeastern Henan province.
The Erlitou site shows sophisticated building remains, usually referred to
as palaces, and also the earliest bronze ritual vessels ever discovered in
China. While the culture takes its name from this principal site, it also
extends north and south of the great bend of the Yellow River with hundreds
of lesser sites sharing the same culture. These sites encompass much of
present-day Henan and southwestern Shanxi provinces, largely coinciding
with the areas that Chinese tradition ascribes to the Xia dynasty.
Archaeologists divide the Erlitou site into four strata indicative of four
dierent developmental periods, the site reaching its height of development
in the third stratum, only to show signs of being eclipsed and destroyed in
the fourth stratum. With the nal destruction of the Erlitou Culture about
1600 or 1500, the culture of the area was replaced by that of the Erligang
culture from areas further to the east. Chinese historians see this as a sign of
the Xia struggle with the rising Shang state, traditionally supposed to have
originated in what is today northeastern Henan province.


Xia

All of this material culture is certainly suggestive of the Xia state. However,
some historians, principal among whom are Western historians of China,
note that no writing of any kind has been found among the Erlitou remains
and thus there is no proof tying this to Xia. Moreover, they argue that the
level of cultural development is not suggestive of the sort of governmental
apparatus that one would associate with a dynastic state, even the rst of the
Three Dynasties of China. In many ways, the debate over the historicity of
the Xia is a matter of denition. However, throughout traditional Chinese
history, including during most of the ancient period that is the focus of this
book, the Xia was held up as an example of how governments could rule
eectively, and also how they could come to a crashing end. Therefore,
whether and in what way the Xia actually existed is probably ultimately less
important than how later people imagined it to have existed.