CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSES OF WU
AND YUE

The state of Wu, also known as Gouwu, Gongyu or Gongwu (the latter three
names apparently the pronunciation in some language other than Chinese,
and the last of these, Gongwu, written with a dierent character pronounced
wu), located along the estuary of the Yangzi River in eastern China, emerged
like a comet across the screen of Chinas ancient history. Although it claimed
a long and noble pedigree, in fact, it entered into history at a relatively late
date, and then also passed out of it quite quickly. However, at the apogee of
its power, during the late sixth and early fth centuries, it burned bright.
Wu claimed to be descended from the Zhou royal family. According to
this story, the pre-dynastic ruler of Zhou Gugong Danfu (c. 1150) had three
sons, Wu the Eldest, Middle Yong, and Royal Cadet. When a son was born to
Royal Cadet with auspicious marks on his body (he is supposed to have had
four nipples), Gugong Danfu determined that this grandson, whose name
was Chang, meaning Flourishing, should one day lead the Zhou people.
Chang is better known as King Wen of Zhou (r. 1099/1056–1050). Given the
Zhou practice of primogeniture, by which the eldest son would normally
succeed the father, and that sons son, and so on, for Chang to become king
it was necessary for Wu the Eldest and Middle Yong to somehow give way to
Royal Cadet. They did so by going into voluntary exile at the opposite end of
what might then have been considered the Chinese world, far to the
southeast, locating at present-day Wuxi in Jiangsu province. In fact, this
pedigree is almost surely ctional. The earliest inscribed bronze vessels cast
for rulers of the state all refer to the state as Gongyu or Gongwu. It was only
after the state began to interact on a regular basis with the Chinese states of
the north that the name began to be written with the wu of Wu the Elder;
this was certainly an attempt to make themselves appear more Chinese. In
fact, it appears that they were successful in this adaptation; the Zhou states
did in fact recognize Wu as their brethren.

Hereditary Houses

Almost nothing is known of the state for more than ve hundred years
after the time of the pre-dynastic Zhou rulers Royal Cadet and King Wen, even
though many historians believe that archaeology has provided at least some
evidence to support this story. In 1954, a tumulus was excavated in Dantu
county, Jiangsu, with several bronze vessels, one of them from the early Western
Zhou with an inscription commemorating a Lord Ze of Yu being commanded
by the Zhou king to relocate to Yi. Because the name Yu contains the
character Wu (together with another component, hu , that indicates the
pronunciation), and because Dantu is located just south of the Yangzi River
and less than one hundred and fty kilometers northwest of Wuxi, many
scholars assumed that this Lord Ze was a descendant of Wu the Eldest, and
that this relocation was from the area of Wuxi to that of Dantu. However,
further research suggests that this Yu and Wu are not directly related; rather, Yu
refers to a location in Shanxi province on the north side of the Yellow River,
and the Yi to which he was transferred was located in the vicinity of the Zhou
eastern capital at Luoyang, Henan. Since all of the other bronze vessels found
in the tumulus together with this Yi Hou Ze gui were from the early Eastern
Zhou period, several hundred years after the early Western Zhou, it would
seem that this vessel must have been transported south at some point in the
intervening years and then buried together with the later vessels.
The next mentions of Wu in the traditional historical record stem from
that later Eastern Zhou period. According to the Zuo Tradition, in , the
great southern state of Chu for the rst time entered into a covenant with the
two states Wu and Yue, both of which were located still further south and
east of Chu. Then in , during a series of wars between Chu and the
northern power Jin, Wuchen, a former Chu minister who had defected to Jin,
recommended that Jin open a new front against Chu by sending aid to Wu,
whose ruler Shoumeng (r. –) had just the previous year followed the
precedent of Chu by taking the title king. Jin sent Wuchen to teach Wu
the northern art of war, focused in particular on archery and chariotry. Over
the course of the next seventy-ve years, Wu grew into a military power.
During this time, Chu and Jin were engaged in almost non-stop combat,
wearing each other out in their competition to be the paramount power.
Meanwhile, Wu continually harassed Chu on its southeastern ank, sapping
that great states strength still further. On the diplomatic front, during the
570s and 560s, Wu participated in several other multi-state conferences. It
was beginning to be recognized as one of the powers of China.
King Shoumeng died in leaving behind four sons by his primary wife:
Zhufan (r. –), Yuji (r. –), Yumei (r. –), and Ji Zha.


Wu and Yue

Although Shoumeng recognized Ji Zha as the most capable of these sons,
and hoped that he would succeed him, Ji Zha did not want to become king
and went into hiding to avoid that fate. Thus, the eldest son, Zhufan, became
king, succeeded in turn by the next two younger brothers. When the third
son Yumei died and ministers sought to have Ji Zha succeed him, Ji Zha once
again ed. With no other principal sons to turn to, the ministers had no
other recourse but to turn to Shoumengs eldest son by a consort; this would
be known as King Liao of Wu (r. –). It is worth noting that it was only
at moments of royal succession that Ji Zha went into hiding. Otherwise, he
was active in aairs of state throughout his very long life. He became
renowned by representing Wu at diplomatic meetings throughout the
northern states and as late as , when he was certainly in his eighties,
brokered a truce between Chu and the Wu ally Chen by arguing that rulers
were better served by virtue than by military arms.
King Liao ruled for just over ten years, but his authority was not accepted
by the mainline descendants of King Shoumeng. At the end of his reign, he
sought to take advantage of a succession crisis in Chu, Wus old nemesis. In
, King Ping of Chu (r. –) died, leaving a young son by a consort
that he had taken from the state of Qin; the son would have been only six or
seven years old at the time. In Wu, Prince Guang, a son of Yumei, the third of
King Shoumengs principal sons, urged King Liao to take advantage of the
uncertain situation in Chu to invade the state, even though there was little
chance that such an attack would succeed. When the Wu army was in fact
defeated, Prince Guang had King Liao assassinated and assumed power
himself. He was known as King Hel (r. –). He would be one of the
most famous rulers of the time, bringing Wu to the pinnacle of power.
During the rst ten years of his reign, King Hel bided his time, advised
by two of the preeminent gures of the time: Wu Zixu (–) and Sunzi
(–). Finally, in , Wu again invaded Chu, this time having much
greater success, at least initially. The Wu army pillaged the Chu capital Ying,
and drove the young Chu king, King Zhao (r. –), into exile at Sui (also
known as Zeng). It was said at the time that King Hel had attempted to rape
King Zhaos mother, the queen mother, though it is also said that she fought
him o with a knife. This would turn out to be one attack too many, and Wus
fortunes in this campaign turned for the worse thereafter. King Hel then
pressed the attack on to Sui, where the young Chu king had gone in exile. Wu
besieged the state capital, but Sui, a long-time ally of Chu, refused to turn
over King Zhao. During the siege, King Zhao of Chu was able to call on his
mothers home state of Qin to come to his rescue; infuriated by King Hels

Hereditary Houses

attempt on her virtue, Qin sent a sizable army that defeated the Wu army.
Meanwhile, Wus neighbor to the south, Yue, took advantage of the Wu army
being in Chu to attack Wu itself. King Hel had no recourse but to return to
Wu with little to show for his original success. After King Hel returned to
Wu, the fortunes of Wu became increasingly inter-twined with those of its
southern neighbor Yue, such that from here on the history of both states
should be told together.
Even less is known about the early history of Yue or Yuyue than is the case
for Wu. The name Yuyue, like those of Gouwu, Gongyu or Gongwu for Wu,
seems to be a Chinese translation from some Austro-Asiatic language. Many
historians hold that a state of Yue, written with a character meaning battle-
axe, is mentioned already in Shang oracle-bone inscriptions, but this is
almost certainly mistaken; that Yue was a small polity somewhere to the west
of the Shang capital, certainly not to its south. The Chinese character with
which Yue came usually to be written means surpassing, perhaps indicating
that Yue was beyond the realm of Chinese culture. Another pronunciation is
viet, as in the name of Vietnam, which means to the South of Yue. Two
features that impressed the northern Chinese are that the people of Yue cut
their hair short and tattooed their bodies, both practices that were taboo in
the north.
Although there are scattered references to Yue in texts such as the Zuo
Tradition and Guanzi for the eighth and seventh centuries, it is only in the
sixth century that the state began to interact with other states, especially Wu.
At this time, the capital of Yue was at Kuaiji, near modern Hangzhou in
Zhejiang province. This coastal location explains why the people of Yue were
frequently associated with water, both for their ability to swim and also for
being the rst state in China to ght from boats; indeed battles between Wu
and Yue were frequently fought on water. But whether on land or on water,
the two states fought almost continuously for over half a century. One of the
rst battles recorded took place in , when Wu attacked and defeated Yue.
After this defeat, Yue sent an assassin to assassinate King Yuji of Wu. A few
years later, the rst ruler of Yue to bear the title of king was Yunchang
(r. –), whose long reign coincided with three kings of Wu: Yumei,
Liao and Hel.
As noted above, in , King Yunchang took advantage of King Hel and
the bulk of the Wu army being occupied with pillaging Chu and chasing
after King Zhao of Chu to invade Wu. This invasion proved abortive when
Hel returned to Wu to face the threat. However, despite his attention to this
outside threat, domestically Hel is said to have become increasingly


Wu and Yue

autocratic, building pleasure palaces for himself, for which he needed to
raise taxes on the common people, and distancing himself from the famous
ministers Wu Zixu and Sunzi, who had helped him achieve his earlier
successes. In , King Yunchang of Yue died of illness, a relatively rare end
for rulers of the two countries at this time. King Hel of Wu sought to take
advantage of Yunchangs death by attacking that southern neighbor, but his
string of reversals continued. Hel was mortally wounded in the battle.
Before dying, he made the crown prince, the future King Fuchai (r. –)
swear that he would avenge his fathers death. Two years later, Fuchai attacked
and defeated Yue, taking its King Goujian (r. –) prisoner. Fortunately
for Goujian, his adviser Fan Li (. fth century) bribed Bo Pi (d. ), who
had outmaneuvered Wu Zixu to become King Fuchais prime minister. Bo Pi
advised Fuchai to allow Goujian and also Fan Li to live as the kings servants.
Throughout their servitude, Fan Li continued to bribe Bo Pi, and within
three years, they were both allowed to return to Yue, Goujian to resume his
kingship there.
After having defeated Yue and humiliated King Goujian by making
him his personal servant, King Fuchai of Wu set his sights on still greater
glory. He now turned his attention to the north. In B.C., Wu constructed
the Han Canal to connect the Yangzi River with the Huai River to its north,
where it also linked with the already existing Hong Canal to provide water
transport as far as the Yellow River. Thus able to supply its army in the eld,
the next year Wu invaded the far northern state of Qi, defeating it at the
battle of Ailing. In subsequent years, Wu extended the canal system
throughout the heavily populated Central Plain of China. Finally, in ,
Fuchai summoned the rulers of the northern states to a conference at
Huangchi. Even Duke Ding of Jin (r. –) realized that the Wu army was
all but invincible, and so the states recognized King Fuchai as Premier ( Ba)
among all of the leaders.
King Fuchais moment of glory would not be long-lasting. By turning his
attention to the north and forgetting about the threat in his rear, Fuchai
repeated the mistake his father King Hel had made just twenty-ve years
earlier. Indeed, his former chief minister Wu Zixu, now serving as ambassador
in Qi, repeatedly warned him to pay attention to Yue in the south. By that
time, Wu Zixu was out of favor in Wu, but his vision of the threat from Yue
would soon prove to be prescient. Even while Fuchai was enjoying the
pinnacle of success at Huangchi, King Goujian of Yue launched an invasion
of Wu, which was defended only by the old and weak under the command of
Fuchais son You (d. ). The Yue army quickly overran the Wu capital and

Hereditary Houses

executed the heir apparent. However, knowing that Yue was still too weak to
face the Wu army upon its return, Goujian quickly retreated. But he had
made his intentions known, and used the next decade to further strengthen
his country.
King Fuchai, again like his father before him, refused to take to heart Wu
Zixus warnings against the state of Yue, and instead turned his attention
more and more to aairs of the heart. It is said that during the time that
King Goujian and his minister Fan Li had spent in captivity in Wu, Fan Li
came to recognize Fuchais weakness for beautiful women. Upon returning
to Yue, he sought out the most beautiful women in the realm, including
especially Xi Shi (. fth century), famed in China as one of the most
beautiful women of all time, and gave them to Fuchai as presents. With
this, instead of building new canals, Fuchai built palaces for his harem and
spent his days bewitched by the beautiful Xi Shi. In , Yue launched a
full-scale invasion of Wu. After a siege that is said to have lasted for three
years, Fuchai wished to surrender, asking for the same terms that he had
extended to King Goujian just twenty years earlier. Fan Li advised Goujian
to refuse this oer. Fuchai was forced to commit suicide, and Yue simply
absorbed the state of Wu. Thus came to an end the brief but glorious history
of the state of Wu.
Immediately after defeating Wu, Goujian too took his army north across
the Yangzi River, convening yet another meeting of the rulers of the various
states at Xuzhou, in present-day Jiangsu province. Not only did the rulers of
Qi and Jin both attend, but King Yuan of Zhou (r. –) sent Goujian
ritual presents signifying that he was now the Premier of all the states, the
last ruler to be accorded this status. Goujian transferred his capital even
further north to Langye, in present-day Shandong, transporting the treasures
of his state on boats navigating the canals that had been built by King Fuchai.
One amusing tale accompanies this transfer. It concerns Goujians great
minister Fan Li. Knowing that Goujian could suer privation well, but
fearing that he would be undone by success, Fan Li took his leave of the state,
living thereafter as something of a hermit, though in the company of the
beautiful Xi Shi.
Yue remained a dominant power throughout the remainder of the fth
century, and survived throughout the entirety of the Warring States period,
nally being exterminated in , during the nal push of the Qin unication.
However, it is the reign of King Goujian, and especially his battles with Kings
Hel and Fuchai of Wu that entered into the imagination of Chinese readers
of all periods. The book Springs and Autumns of Wu and Yue has long been


Wu and Yue

a favorite not only for the stories of these three rulers, but also for those of
Wu Zixu, Sunzi, Fan Li, Xi Shi and other notable gures. In the case of Wu, it
is a story of how quickly success can turn to defeat, and in the case of Yue,
how it is possible to turn even the greatest humiliation into the worlds
greatest recognition.