CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF SHANG YANG

Wei Yang or Gongsun Yang, better known as Shang Yang (c. –), is often
regarded as the architect of the traditional Chinese bureaucratic state. He was a
nobleman of the small state of Wi in the center of the north China plain, but
made his name in the western state of Qin, where he served as the prime
minister under Duke Xiao (r. –). His reforms there touched on virtually
every aspect of governance: land reform, the military, administration, law,
taxation, and even weights and measures. Just before the end of his life, he
personally led a Qin attack on the state of Wei 兿 (dierent from the state in
which he was born, but where he had previously served), winning a great victory,
for which Duke Xiao awarded him fteen cities in Shang; it is for this reason
that he came to be known as the Lord of Shang or simply Lord Shang. He is
credited with writing the book The Book of Lord Shang, which is usually regarded
as one of the founding texts of the political philosophy known as Legalism.
Despite his great accomplishments, Shang Yang made powerful enemies among
the nobility of Qin, and did not long outlive his patron Duke Xiao.
As a native of Wi, Shang Yang would have been familiar with the
government and military reforms initiated there by Wu Qi (–) just
decades earlier. As a young man still in his twenties, he came to the attention
of Gongshu Cuo (d. ), the prime minister of Wei, who induced him to
move to that state. However, the ruler of the state, Lord Hui of Wei (r.
/–), rejected repeated advice to give Shang Yang a position of
responsibility, regarding him as too young. Gongshu Cuo is reported to have
warned the lord—quite presciently—either to employ him or to kill him,
that if he allowed him to serve another state it would certainly be to the
detriment of Wei. During his short time in Wei, Shang Yang became aware of
the thorough-going government reforms introduced there by Li Kui (–
). When Duke Xiao of Qin succeeded in that western state and announced
that he was seeking worthy advisers wherever they may be found, presumably
as part of his desire to strengthen the position of the ruler vis--vis the
nobility of the state, Shang Yang moved yet again, taking with him a copy of

Biographies

Li Kuis Classic of Law.
Within just two years, Shang Yang began to implement his reforms, taking
as his guiding principle that no single principle is always and everywhere
eective; as the times change and new problems emerge, the policies used to
address them need to evolve. In practical terms, he began with the rst of
what he called the two handles of government: agriculture (the other being
the military). To strengthen agriculture, the entire population was registered,
and no one was permitted to move o the land; people from other states
were actively encouraged to migrate to Qin, so long as they were willing to
work the land. Merchants were forbidden to sell grain, though they were
employed as middlemen to handle the grain supplies for the army, for which
purpose he standardized the size of carts carrying the grain. Most other
mercantile enterprises were suppressed. Taxes on the goods that were
permitted to be sold were raised dramatically. The nobility too saw their land
taxes increased, and for the rst time they were required to contribute labor
to the state. Intellectuals were forbidden to engage in debates or otherwise to
broadcast their views to the common people, who were likewise discouraged
from attaining an education, on the grounds that it would distract them
from their main responsibility. Nevertheless, he decreed that all people were
equal under the law, including even the nobility, and the intellectuals.
Three years later, in , Shang Yang was appointed Assistant Head of the
Multitudes, a part of a strict twenty-rank ranking system for all individuals
that the state of Qin adopted at this time. Among the reforms that he
instituted at this time was to systematize the former city and county
structures, such that the populace was organized into anity groups of ve,
ten, and fty households. If any single individual committed a crime, the
entire group was responsible for reporting the infraction; whoever reported
such a crime would be rewarded by having his rank elevated. On the other
hand, the property of the criminal would be conscated and shared with the
other members of the group. The military was organized in a similar fashion,
rst with units of ve soldiers and then larger regiments of one hundred
soldiers, all with shared responsibility. If any single soldier deserted, the
other four members of the unit would be equally liable. On the other hand,
the units and regiments would share in rewards for meritorious service: for
instance, if any single soldier killed thirty-three enemy soldiers, the entire
unit would have its rank raised by one grade. One of the responsibilities of
the generals was to perform an after-battle investigation to evaluate the
performance of each soldier, each unit, and each regiment, so as to determine
rewards and punishments. Noble families without military accomplishments


Shang Yang

would be stripped of their noble perquisites; on the other hand, common
soldiers could earn those sorts of perquisites on the battleeld. Soldiers who
were killed in battle would have their rank passed on to their descendants.
Laws of inheritance also saw a general reform at this time, with important
implications for the economy of the state. Families were recognized as
independent units, but property was inherited equally by all male members.
This was designed to break up the great extended families, whose power in
the past rivaled that even of the state. Indeed, another reform was to outlaw
all private militias and all ghting not specically sanctioned by the state.
These reforms initially met with resistance on the part of both the common
people and especially of the nobility. However, public order was soon
stabilized within the country as no one dared to break the law, while
externally Qin grew stronger and stronger.
In , Shang Yang oversaw the building of a new capital for the state.
Prior to this time, the capital of Qin had been at Yueyang, on the second-
level plateau north of the Wei River near modern-day Baoji, Shaanxi. The
new capital was located about one hundred kilometers to the east, on the
north bank of the Wei River, just across the Wei River from the old Zhou
capital. Designed according to the temple system in use in the old Zhou
states of Lu and Wi, this relocation of the capital simultaneously weakened
the authority of the old nobility of the state, and also explicitly announced
Qins imperial intentions. In just one decade, through the reforms of Duke
Xiao and Shang Yang, Qin had been rejuvenated, and King Xian of Zhou
(r. –) recognized Duke Xiao as Premier of the leaders of all the states.
In conjunction with the move to the new capital, Shang Yang promulgated
a new series of reforms, which included the standardization of land parcels
and taxes. Land was divided into separate rectangles paces long. This
was apparently the size of land that could be worked by a single adult male,
which was consistent with the preceding change in inheritance laws
encouraging small nuclear families. Also at this time, the previous system of
counties was extended to the entire state, now with forty-one counties in all,
each of which was administered by a governor and a general, all directly
responsible to the central government. This would eventually be adapted by
the First Emperor of Qin (r. /–), after his unication of all of the
other states.
The lengthy reign of Duke Xiao of Qin came to an end in , when he
died of illness. There is at least one report that before he died, Duke Xiao
proposed that he be succeeded by none other than Shang Yang, but that
Shang Yang declined this honor. Despite this, without his ruling patron,

Biographies

Shang Yangs fortunes quickly changed dramatically. He knew that he had
made many powerful enemies. Shortly after his rst set of reforms was set in
place, in , the states crown prince Si, later to be known as Lord Huiwen
(r. –) and then as King Huiwen (r. –), had broken one of the
new laws. Since it was not possible to inict corporal punishment on the
crown prince, Shang Yang decided that his tutors should be held responsible
for his conduct. He ned the ducal tutor Prince Qian and branded his
teacher Gongsun Jia. Somewhat later, Prince Qian was again found guilty of
yet another infraction, and was punished by having his nose amputated.
Added to the personal enmity created by these decisions, Shang Yangs
policies of breaking up the noble families had turned them against him. For
that reason, after Duke Xiaos death, Shang Yang attempted to ee the
country. According to one story, he was refused refuge at an inn because he
did not have a proper registry identication, one of the laws that he had been
responsible for establishing. Whatever the case, Lord Huiwen sent troops
after him, and he was killed in battle. His corpse was returned to the capital
Xianyang, where it was torn apart by ve chariots, and his family was
exterminated to the ninth degree.
Despite this unhappy end to his life, the legacy of Shang Yang has lived on
in the bureaucratic state that has characterized China since his time. It still
lives today.