CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF LU, THE ELDER OF JING

Lu, Elder of Jing and Supervisor of the Horse, most often referred to as just
Elder of Jing, is mentioned in about twenty dierent bronze inscriptions of
the middle Western Zhou period (though often not with his full name or full
title), including some of the longest and best-known inscriptions of the time.
He was clearly the most important gure in the government, other than the
king himself, and was the patriarch of a family that would continue to be
important for the next years. Nevertheless, the name is totally unknown
in the received textual tradition; everything we know about him has to be
pieced together on the basis of these bronze inscriptions.
The only bronze vessel on which the Elder of Jing is referred to by his full-
name and title was discovered in 1963 in Wugong County, Shaanxi, very
near to the Zhou homeland known as the Zhouyuan; it is known as the Shi
Yun gui. Although only the cover of the vessel survives, it is decorated with
two facing long-tailed birds, showing that it was almost certainly made
during the reign of King Mu of Zhou (r. –). The inscription records
that the king visited the Palace of the Armys Supervisor of the Horse, where
Lu, Elder of Jing and Supervisor of the Horse served as the guarantor, the
right-hand man, to someone name Captain Yun, who received the kings
command to supervise the military ocers of the city. The inscription is
entirely formulaic and would not have attracted much attention if it hadnt
provided the key to identifying the Elder of Jing.
Some forty years later, in 2005, the National Museum of China purchased
in a Hong Kong antiques gallery a bronze vessel that had obviously been
robbed from a tomb some years earlier. This bronze vessel, bearing the same
ornamentation of facing long-tailed birds as seen on the Shi Yun gui,
commemorates the appointment of Lu as Supreme Commander of the Horse.
Without the Shi Yun gui, there would have been no way to know that this Lu
was none other than the Elder of Jing. Although the inscription on this vessel
is also more or less formulaic, it is crucial for understanding his career.

Biographies

It was the twenty-fourth year, ninth month, after the full moon, gengyin
(day ), the king was at Zhou and approached the Grand Chamber,
assuming position. Supervisor of Crafts Yin entered at the right of Lu,
standing in the center of the court facing north. The king called out to
the foreman of the Maker of the Slips to read the command to Lu,
saying: Succeed to your grandfathers responsibility, serving as
Supreme Supervisor of the Horse. You will then remonstrate and judge
assiduously, taking as salary ten le. I award you red kneepads, a
somber jade pendant, a metal chariot with metal reins and pennant.
You will then be on guard morning and night, not neglecting my
command, and you will begin the oerings.
Lu bowed and touched his head to the ground, daring in response to
extol the Son of Heavens grace, herewith making for my cultured
grandfather the Somber Elder this treasured tureen. May Lu for ten
thousand years have grandsons and sons eternally to treasure and use it.

The date at the beginning of the inscription, the twenty-fourth year, ninth
month, after the full moon, gengyin (day ), corresponds to August ,
BCE. To be named Supreme Supervisor of the Horse, essentially the Minister
of War or the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Sta, Lu must have been
reasonably mature. However, from the other bronze inscriptions in which he
appears, it is clear that he lived through the remainder of King Mus reign, all
of the reign of King Mus son, King Gong (r. –), and into the rst years
of his grandson, King Yih (r. –).
As in the case of the Shi Yun gui above, in many of the inscriptions in
which the Elder of Jing appears, his role is as guarantor for military gures,
many of whom bear the title Captain (shi). Even in one case in which the
appointee does not have the title Captain, the Dou Bi gui, the ceremony takes
place in the Great Chamber of Captain Xi, and Dou Bi is commanded to
oversee the bows and arrows of the Supervisor of the Horse of the States
Lord of Youyu, apparently a kind of regional warlord. In another vessel, the
Chang Xin he, the Elder of Jing joins in an archery contest, surely a prerogative
of military gures.

It was the third month, rst auspiciousness, dinghai (day ); King Mu
was at the Lower Yu Residence. King Mu oered the sweet-wine and
approached the Elder of Jing and the Grand Priests shooting. King Mu
praised Chang Xin and took (him) to come to approach the Elder of


Supervisor of the Horse Lu, the Elder of Jing

Jing. The Elder of Jing was respectful and not deceitful. Chang Xin was
praised for (his) accomplishments and dares in response to extol the
Son of Heavens incomparable grace, herewith initiating the making of
this oertory vessel.

That the Elder of Jing took part in the archery contest in front of the king
already shows his considerable prestige. That the king would seek him out
and introduce Chang Xin to him is unprecedented among other inscriptions
of the time.
In several bronze inscriptions from the following reign of King Gong,
the Elder of Jing assumed a new responsibility: as a judge of court cases,
especially those involving land disputes. These inscriptions are especially
important for the early history of both business transactions and also of
law suits. In the rst of these, dated to the third year of King Gongs reign
(), the Elder of Jing was just one of a jury of ve judges. In later
inscriptions, he would be listed as the rst of the judges, presumably
indicating his leadership of the jury. The earliest of the vessels, the Qiu Wei
he, provides valuable information about land prices: someone named
Shuren, Elder of Ju, rst sold ten elds to Qiu Wei, the maker of the vessel,
the price being a single jade tablet valued at eighty strands of cowries, and
then subsequently sold him another three elds, the price of these being
two red tiger-skins, two deer knee-pads, and one painted skirt, their price
being twenty strands.

It was the third year, third month, after the growing brightness, renyin
(day ); the king erected the pennant at Feng. Shuren, Elder of Ju,
took a presentation demi-tablet from Qiu Wei, at eighty strands of
cowries its value. He gave up ten elds. Ju then took two red tiger-
skins, two deer knee-pads and one painted skirt, at twenty strands of
cowries. He gave up three elds. Qiu Wei then respectfully reported to
Elder Yifu, the Elder of Rong, the Elder of Ding, the Elder of Jing and
the Elder of Shan, who then commanded the Three Supervisors:
Supervisor of Lands Wei Yi, Supervisor of the Horse Shan Yu, and
Supervisor of Works Yirenfu conjointly to give the elds at Bin and Fu.
Weis young son Zhi met Zhu Qi to feast him.
Wei herewith makes (for) my cultured deceased-father Hui Meng
this treasured basin. May Wei for ten thousand years eternally treasure
and use it.

Biographies

Other inscriptions show that the Jing lineage, of which the Elder of Jing
seems to have been the patriarch (even though the Lu gui inscription
indicates that his own grandfather was Supervisor of the Horse before him),
occupied a network of lands and cities to the west of the Zhou homeland in
the Zhouyuan, along the Beishan mountain range in northeast Qianyang,
northern Fengxiang, and northeastern Linyou counties of Shaanxi. Indeed,
the cadet branch of the extended family had its family cemetery just across
the Feng River from the Zhou capital at Hao; it was excavated in the 1980s,
turning up hundreds of tombs. Unfortunately many of these had been looted
in antiquity, but they still give some indication of both the extent and wealth
of the family.
There is evidence that toward the end of the Western Zhou period, the
family lost its original land holdings to the west of the Zhou homeland and
the retainers on it absconded to other families. One of the most famous
vessels of all, the Da Ke ding, dated to about during the reign of King
Xuan (r. –), contains the following command to Ke,

Ke, previously I had commanded you to bring out and take in my
commands. Now I am extending and increasing your command,
awarding you plain knee-pads, a tri-corner hat, and a centered jade. I
award you elds at Ye; award you elds at Bi; award you the Jing
familys attached elds at Yun, with their vassals and women; award
you elds at Kang; award you elds at Yan; award you elds at Bo
Plains; award you elds at Han Mountain; award you scribes and
minor vassals, chimists and utists, drummers and bellmen; award
you the registers of men raised by and attached to Jing; award you Jing
men (who) have ed to Dong. Respectfully morning and night
herewith serve. Do not neglect my command.

The award of so many Jing-family lands and retainers to Ke seems to have
spelled the end of the Jing lineage. Nevertheless, Lu, Elder of Jing and
Supervisor of the Horse, during the reign of King Mu, played an important
role in consolidating the power of the dynasty at a critical time in its life.