CHAPTER
BASIC ANNALS OF YAO AND SHUN

According to relatively late traditions, Chinese civilization began with a
series of culture heroes, the Three August Ones: Suiren, the inventor of re;
Fuxi, the tamer of beasts; and Shennong, the creator of agriculture, and the
Five Thearchs: the Yellow Thearch, who rst suppressed various competitors
for power, and then having brought peace to the realm established norms of
government for it; Zhuanxu, the grandson of the Yellow Thearch who, after
emerging victorious from a succession struggle with one Gong Gong,
formed a government assisted by three primary ministers: Goumang, in
charge of the forests, Zhurong, in charge of re; and Julong, in charge of the
soil; Thearch Ku, a great grandson of the Yellow Thearch, a benevolent and
august, gracious and sincere ruler, but especially notable for having had four
principal wives, with each of whom he is said to have sired a son who would
eventually become the high ancestor of one of Chinas early realms: Hou Ji,
the Lord of Millet, the high ancestor of the Zhou people; Xie, the progenitor
of the Shang people; Thearch Zhi, who succeeded Thearch Ku, but then
proved to be unworthy; and Fangxun, better known as Yao, who succeeded
Thearch Zhi and would become one of the Five Thearchs. With this one,
admittedly quite lengthy sentence, we have passed through the rst
millennium or so of Chinas traditional history, or perhaps more properly of
Chinas traditional mythology. The names in this rst sentence have been
known to all Chinese since no later than the Han dynasty, but they properly
belong to the stu of legend and mythology, not history. Therefore, this
being a historical record of ancient China, we need say no more about them.
Yao too belongs more to mythology than to history. Nevertheless, since
many of the earliest histories of Chinese civilization begin with him, and
college surveys of Chinese civilization were once routinely referred to as
Yao to Mao courses, it seems appropriate for us to do so as well. For
instance, the rst chapter of the Exalted Scriptures, one of the ve Chinese
classics, is called the Canon of Yao. It describes how Yao deputed four
brothers of the Xi and He families to use the stars to determine the Basic Annals
astronomical equinoxes and solstices and to establish a -day year. With
the calendar established, Yao then ruled, apparently eortlessly, for the next
seventy years, the common people and even the birds and the beasts thereby
being able to live in accordance with the seasons, planting in spring, growing
through the summer, harvesting in autumn, and storing things for the winter.
After these seventy years of reign and having become in his turn aged,
Yao began to search for a successor. Various sycophants proposed dierent
people, including rst Yaos own son Dan Zhu; Yao rejected them all. Finally,
the chiefs of the sacred mountains recommended to him a man named
Shun, an aging bachelor who had achieved a reputation as a virtuous son
and brother despite living with a father who was blind, both physically and
morally, a deceitful step-mother, and a younger half-brother who was the
favorite of his parents. Yao tested him by marrying his two daughters to
Shun. When Shun proved to be an equally virtuous husband, Yao determined
to turn the government over to him little by little. Shun took on ever greater
responsibilities, winning universal acclaim for his abilities. After three years,
Yao attempted to yield power to Shun. Although Shun presided over the
rituals appropriate to the ruler, he declined to accept the title. Thus, Yao
continued to rule, at least nominally for another twenty-ve years. In the
ninetieth year of his reign, Yao retired to Tao, the place he had rst been
deputed to rule. Ten years later, in his hundredth year, Yao died.
After observing three years of mourning for the deceased ruler, Shun
attempted to pass authority on to Danzhu, Yaos son. However, the people
would not hear of this and so Shun nally came to rule in his own right. His
rst eorts in this endeavor were to seek out capable administrators to assist
him. Chief among these was Yu, who was put in charge of the rivers and
streams. Others were put in charge of what we would today call agriculture,
health and human services, the judiciary, labor, the environment, and culture
and the arts. Like Yao before him, once having entrusted authority to these
assistants, Shun did not interfere in their work, and yet almost all operated
smoothly. Of course, in recognition that sometimes things did go wrong, Shun
is credited with standardizing the rst legal code, though he is also supposed
to have tempered the most severe of the punishments. Similarly, while there
were those, referred to as the Four Criminals (Gong Gong, Huan Dou, San
Miao, and Gun), who resisted his rule, Shun merely banished them to the ends
of the known earth. Once that was done, all under Heaven (tianxia) submitted.
Almost like Yao, who is said to have died in the hundredth year of his
reign, Shun died at the age of one hundred, having ruled in his own right for
exactly fty years. But just like Yao, before dying Shun declined to pass power Yao and Shun
to his own son, oering it instead to Yu, the hydraulic engineer. Much of this
is recounted in the Canon of Shun, the second chapter in the canonical
Exalted Scriptures.It would be easy to dismiss these stories of Yao and Shun as nothing more
than myths and legends, which they surely are. There is no reason to believe
that at the time they were said to have lived, from roughly 2200 to just before
2000 BCE, any local societies in what is today China had reached such a
level of government, much less extending control over the entirety of the
Chinese landmass. Nevertheless, well over a thousand years after this time,
during the time that will be the main focus of this book, Yao and Shun were
continually held up as paradigms of proper rule, the Golden Age of highest
antiquity. This is to be seen not only in the Exalted Scriptures, which, as noted
above, begins with the canons of these rulers, but also in many of the
classical philosophical writings, including especially those concerning
Confucius and his followers. Some rulers of this later period would even try
to imitate their example, at least by deputing executive authority to a rising
ministerial class. However, in the late fourth century when the ruler of the
state of Yan, the capital of which was more or less where Beijing is now
located, attempted to go so far as to abdicate in favor of his prime minister,
the rulers of other states viewed this as an existential threat to their own
royal prerogatives. In , the neighboring state of Qi invaded Yan, deposing
the prime minister, Zi Zhi. This incident is often viewed as one of the pivotal
moments in the disintegration of the ancient Chinese state system, and its
signicance was already widely recognized by statesmen and philosophers—
what we might call political scientists—of the time.One of the political scientists who was very much implicated in this
incident, Mencius (c. –), who was serving as an advisor to the king of
Qi at the time, framed his entire political philosophy around Yao and Shun.
One chapter of the book that bears his name, the Wan Zhang chapter, is
almost entirely devoted to stories about Yao and Shun. In another chapter,
that focuses on the question of human nature, whether humans are inherently
good or evil (or perhaps a little of both), when asked whether humans can all
become a Yao or a Shun, Mencius responded in the armative: If you wear
Yaos clothes, chant Yaos words, and enact Yaos acts, this is Yao and nothing
else. On the other hand, If you wear Jies clothes, chant Jies words, and enact
Jies acts, this is Jie and nothing else, Jie being the last ruler of the Xia dynasty,
the period that is said to have followed the rule of Yao and Shun. Elsewhere
Mencius said, After the deaths of Yao and Shun, the Way of the sages declined
and violent rulers arose one after another. This was only a slight exaggeration.