CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF CHU

According to Records of the Historian, the hereditary house of Chu, arguably
the greatest power of the entire Eastern Zhou period, began with Zhuanxu,
a grandson of the legendary Yellow Emperor (Huang Di). Three generations
later, his great grandson Chong Li is said to have had great merit as the
Regulator of Fire under the emperor Di Ku, and so Di Ku named him
the Zhu Rong (Prayer of Fusion). When Chong Li then failed to suppress the
disturbance caused by Gong Gong, Di Ku had him executed and replaced
with his younger brother Wu Hui, who was also named as Zhu Rong. This
Zhu Rong would come to be worshipped in Chu texts of the Warring States
period as the high ancestor of the Chu people; sacrices were routinely
oered to him rst and foremost. This Zhu Rong is said to have had six sons,
the youngest of whom was named Ji Lian (Cadet Connection). Records of the
Historian notes laconically that the house of Chu descended from him. A
recently unearthed manuscript of the Warring States period entitled
Residences of Chu, which recounts the many capital cities of the state of Chu
over the course of the centuries, provides more detail about Ji Lian:

Ji Lian rst descended upon Roan Mountain, arriving at the Exhausted
Cave. He went forward out of Lofty Mountain, and dwelled upon its
slope. Going upstream along the Wide River, he saw the children of
Whorling (Pan) Geng living upon Square Mountain. One daughter
was named Ancestress Zhui. She held tight to his leading visage, her
beauty acknowledged throughout the four quarters. Ji Lian heard that
she was available and followed and reached her at Whorling. And then
she gave birth to the elder son Ying and the second-born Yuan.

This suggests a relationship between the progenitors of Chu and the
rulers of the Shang dynasty. On the other hand, a poem from the Shang
Hymns section of the Classic of Poetry entitled Soldiers of Yin describes a
Shang attack on Chu, bringing it into submission under the Shang state.

Hereditary Houses

Piercing were those soldiers of Yin, Rising up and attacking Jing Chu,
Deeply entering their blockades, Rounding up the legions of Jing,
Cutting o their places of life: The threads of the grandsons of Tang.

Whether through marital relations or military conquest, there is a long
tradition that the state of Chu goes back in time to the Shang dynasty.
The poem Soldiers of Yin refers to the Chu people by the double name
Jing Chu. Both chu and jing refer to a type of hard thorn-wood, the latter
word being also the name of Jing Mountain, located in the northwestern
part of modern Hubei province near where the state of Chu had its
beginnings. The Residences of Chu manuscript also provides a rationale for
why the state got its name. After the account of Ji Lians marriage to a
daughter of the Shang king Pan Geng, the text continues with another
marriage of Ji Lian, though he is now referred to by another name, Xue
Xiong, to one Ancestress Lie.

Xue Xiong slowly transferred to the Great Temple, where he met
Ancestress Lie upstream along the Zai River; her appearance was of
whispering ears. Then he married her and she gave birth to Dou the
Third and Li the Youngest. The birth of Li was not smooth, as he
emerged from her side. Ancestress Li was hosted by Heaven, where
Magician Xian healed her side with a stick of thorn-wood (chu), and
that is why until today the people are called Chu.

The state was referred to as Chu, while the rulers came from the Xiong
lineage, which seems to have had a bear as its totem.
According to Records of the Historian, after Ji Lian there is a gap in the
genealogical records of Chu rulers for the remaining two centuries of the
Shang dynasty, with the statement that sometimes the state was located in
the central kingdoms and sometimes among the Man and Yi barbarians.
The genealogy picks up again with the beginning of the Zhou dynasty, when
Xiong Yi was rewarded for his services to King Cheng of Zhou (r. 1042/1035–
1006) by being established at Danyang, in the upper or middle reaches of the
Han River valley in what is now southwestern Henan and northwestern
Hubei. Following this, another ve generations follow with nothing more
than the names of Chu rulers.
Inscribed bronze vessels from the Western Zhou period ll in some of
this gap, indicating in particular that Zhou and Chu were at least occasionally
at war with each other. The most important of these wars took place in the


Chu

early tenth century, when King Zhao of Zhou (r. /–) personally
commanded the Zhou armies in a campaign against Chu. For the Zhou, the
campaign was a catastrophe, with the king drowning in the Han River and
the Zhou armies being decimated. We do not have Chu records concerning
this event; presumably they would have seen it as a great victory. A century
or so later, Chu joined with the Southern Huai Peoples, a confederation of
southern and eastern peoples, to attack the Zhou heartland, reaching almost
to the Zhou eastern capital at Luoyang before nally being repulsed. This
Zhou victory is recounted in the inscription on the Yu ding. The inscription
makes clear that the Zhou army was no match for the Chu and Huai Peoples
invaders, but had to rely on a warlord, the Martial Duke, to save their own
capital.
After another century or so, taking advantage of great turmoil among the
now fully independent states of north China, which were experiencing
assassinations, civil wars, and attacks back and forth, Chu took its rst step
toward expanding to the north. In , during the reign of King Wu of Chu
(r. –), the rst ruler of the many states to arrogate the title of king
(wang) theretofore formally reserved for just the Zhou king, it attacked Zeng
(known in traditional texts as Sui), one of the oldest Zhou states, which was
located just to the north of Chus own capital region. Although Zeng was not
brought fully under Chu control until the reign of King Wus son, King Wen
(r. –), it would serve thereafter as a loyal ally of Chu, often acting very
much in concert with later Chu rulers. King Wen pressed his expansion
farther and farther north, bringing other old Zhou states into its alliance,
including the state of Cai, which had been founded by one of the sons of
King Wen of Zhou, and threatening also the state of Zheng in the very heart
of the Yellow River valley. With this, Chu was recognized as one of the largest
and most powerful states of all, and King Wens successor (after a brief
interregnum), King Cheng (r. –) was renowned for his virtue and
generosity—at least at the beginning of his reign.
In , Chus expansion nally brought it into contact with what was then
the strongest state of north China, the state of Qi. Qi was then ruled by Duke
Huan (r. –), the rst of the many lords to be widely recognized as
premier (ba)—rst among equals. Although Qis campaign, led by Duke
Huans famous minister Guan Zhong (–), is portrayed in the Zuo
Tradition, as one of chastisement, with Guan Zhong essentially scolding Chu
for misbehaving, in fact it is clear that it resulted in a stando between the
two superpowers of the day. The story of their encounter is both amusing
and illustrative of inter-state relations.

Hereditary Houses

In the fourth year, in spring, the Lord of Qi took the armies of the
many lords to invade Cai. Cai collapsed. Subsequently they attacked
Chu. The Prince of Chu sent an envoy to speak with the general,
saying: Your ruler dwells near the northern sea, while I, the unworthy
one, dwell near the southern sea. Given these airs, even our horses
and cattle will not couple, so I would not anticipate that you would
wade into our territory. Why have you done so? Guan Zhong
replied, In the past Duke Kang of Shao commanded our former
ruler the Grand Duke, saying, As for the princes of the ve lords and
nine premiers, it is really for you to chastise them in order to assist the
house of Zhou. . . . Your oerings of bundled cogon-grass did not
arrive, so that the kings sacrices were not supplied, and there was
nothing with which to lter the ale. This is what I, the unworthy
one, have come to complain about. Moreover, King Zhao campaigned
to the south but did not return. I would like to ask about this as
well. The envoy responded, It was our lords fault that the tribute
did not arrive. Would we dare not to supply it in the future? As for
King Zhaos not returning, milord should ask about that on the banks
of the river.

Having suciently chastised Chu, the Qi army then withdrew.
Just over a decade later, rst Guan Zhong and then Duke Huan of Qi both
died, bringing Qis period of hegemony to an end. While Chu would have
dearly loved to be recognized as its successor, it would be thwarted in this by
another of the old northern states: Jin. Jins rise at this time, under the
leadership of Chonger—posthumously known as Duke Wen of Jin (r. –
), is one of the great stories of the Springs and Autumns period,
appropriately told elsewhere in this history. In , after traveling for
eighteen years throughout north China, including among both Chinese and
non-Chinese states, Chonger came nally to Chu, where King Cheng
entertained him with the respect due to a head of state before sending him
back north with many presents. This goodwill between the two rulers would
be remembered, but only in the breach. In , Chu was requested to
intercede in a succession struggle in the state of Qi among the several sons
of Duke Huan. This brought it further north than it had ever before been.
When it then attacked the state of Song, ruled by descendants of the former
Shang dynasty, Song turned for assistance to Jin, now ruled by Chonger.
With this, King Cheng wished to break o the attack on Song, and to return
to Chu. However, the general in command of his army, Prince Yu (d. ),


Chu

insisted on pressing the attack. King Cheng left him with a small force, which
was soundly defeated by a coalition of states under the leadership of Jin at a
place called Chengpu, located in the southwestern part of present-day
Shandong province. Infuriated with the defeat and Prince Yus
insubordination, King Cheng had him put to death. The battle of Chengpu is
often regarded as the high-water mark of Chu expansion, and the decisive
event cementing northern rule of China. In fact, this was by no means the
last battle between Chu and Jin, the two states trading victories over the next
several decades.
The series of excellent rulers beginning with King Wu and ending with
King Cheng was now followed by a string of weak, or even evil, rulers,
beginning with King Chengs grandson, King Zhuang (r. –). The rst
ve years of his rule were marked by his own licentious behavior and
inattention to government business. Then, after reforming himself, the rest
of his twenty-three years of reign brought one war after another. Yet another
story in the Zuo Tradition provides some indication of King Zhuangs
arrogance. One campaign north brought him to the outskirts of the Zhou
capital at Luoyang. When King Ding of Zhou (r. –) sent an envoy
bearing gifts for King Zhuang, King Zhuang is said to have asked about the
size and weight of the bronze caldrons at court, the symbols of royal
legitimacy. The royal envoy responded that their signicance resided in
virtue, and not in their size, recounting how the caldrons were rst cast
during the Xia dynasty, but then when that dynasty lost its popular
mandate to rule, were transferred to the founder of the Shang dynasty; when
the last Shang rulers in their own turn lost the mandate, the caldrons were
then transferred to the Zhou. The envoy allowed as to how the house of
Zhou was in decline, but it had not yet lost the Mandate of Heaven, and
it was not acceptable for the Chu king to inquire after these symbols of
legitimate rule.
The next generations brought about the nadir of Chu governance. Perhaps
the worst of the Chu kings was King Ling (r. –). Originally known as
Prince Wei, he was the second son of King Gong (–) and younger
brother of King Kang (r. –). This made him also the uncle of Jiaao
(r. –), King Kangs son, who succeeded to power upon the death of his
father. However, shortly thereafter Prince Wei had him murdered together
with his two sons, and took over as king himself, ruling for twelve years.
During this time, he was extremely ambitious, in bringing the rulers of
the northern states, including the great state of Jin, together for a conference
where he hoped to be named premier. This was unsuccessful. Nevertheless,

Hereditary Houses

King Ling continued to expand northward, attacking the old Zhou states of
Chen and Cai. The attack against Cai was led by his own brother Qiji, who
captured the Cai heir-apparent. King Ling ordered that Qiji be made Duke
of Cai, and that the Cai heir-apparent be sacriced to the gods. In other
examples of King Lings arrogance, he determined that his consorts were not
suciently prominent for his status, and so took a new consort from Jin; he
then quickly moved to install her as his queen.
In , fearing the rise of the eastern state of Wu, the capital of which was
then located near Wuxi in present-day Jiangsu province, the king turned his
attention away from the north and personally led a campaign against the
state of Xu, which commanded the route between Chu and Wu. A story in
the Zuo Tradition for this year reects the kings mindset at this time.
According to this anecdote, King Ling had a turtle-shell divination
performed, in which he announced I wish to gain all under heaven. When
the result turned out not to be auspicious, he is said to have thrown the turtle
away and to have cursed heaven, screaming If you do not give me even this
triing thing, I will certainly take it for myself. Not only did he not take it for
himself, while he was on campaign in Xu, his youngest brother Qiji led a
coup against him, occupying the Chu capital, killing King Lings two sons,
and installing his elder brother Bi as king. Deserted by his army and unable
to nd any support among the common people, King Ling eventually
committed suicide. However, unaware that the king was no longer alive, and
fearful that he would return to the capital, his brother Bi also committed
suicide. With this, the youngest brother Qiji assumed the kingship, ruling as
King Ping (r. –).
King Ping restored stability in Chu, but only for a short while.
Unfortunately, his reign sowed the seeds for one of Chus great calamities.
The rst of these seeds of discontent concerned his crown prince, Jian.
Seeking a bride for Jian, he dispatched the assistant tutor to the crown prince
to the state of Qin to request a daughter of Duke Ai of Qin (r. –).
When the assistant returned, King Ping found the bride-to-be so beautiful
that he took her as his own consort; they soon had a son, who was named the
new crown prince. The former crown prince Jian then went into exile, while
his principal tutor, a man named Wu She remained in the capital
remonstrating against the kings behavior. The king soon tired of the
criticism, and condemned Wu She to be executed unless his two sons, Wu
Shang and Wu Zixu, would come to the capital and be executed in his place.
Wu Shang was regarded in the state as a paragon of lial piety, while Wu
Ziyu was known for his political cunning. The lial Wu Shang went to the


Chu

capital to accept his fate, but the cunning Wu Zixu did not. Wu Zixu
eventually made his way to the still farther southern state of Wu, where his
exploits would become one of the great stories of the late Springs and
Autumns period.
In , King Ping died and was in fact succeeded by the son of his consort
from Qin; this son, who would be known as King Zhao (r. –), was just
a young boy at the time. Wu Zixu, already employed as an advisor to King
Liao of Wu (r. –) urged the king to launch a surprise attack against
Chu. When this attack failed, King Liaos nephew assassinated him, assuming
power in Wu as King Hel (r. –). Ten years later, Wu again attacked
Chu, this time with much greater success, at least initially. After several
battles, the Wu army entered the Chu capital, and King Zhao was forced
to ee to its neighbor Sui, also known as Zeng. Wu Zixu, accompanying
the Wu army, dug up the grave of King Ping of Chu, who had executed his
father and elder brother, and whipped the corpse three hundred times.
Nevertheless, the Wu army was ultimately unsuccessful in capturing King
Zhao; the siege at Sui was lifted when Duke Ai of Qin, King Zhaos maternal
grandfather, sent an army to rescue him. This would set the stage for
continuous relations between Qin and Chu, sometimes as allies, but much
more often as adversaries.
For the next century and a half, Chu seems to have stayed out of relations
with its northern neighbors, at least for the most part. However, even though
the various northern states eclipsed it in terms of military power and
diplomatic inuence, Chu remained the largest state in terms of territory
and a state to which others would turn for alliances. By the middle of the
fourth century, Chu was no longer seen as the principal menace to the
central states; that distinction would now be accorded to Qin, which had
grown increasingly powerful due to the reforms instituted during the reign
of Duke Xiao (r. –) by his famous chancellor Shang Yang (c. –
). Through much of this time, Chu and Qin maintained their previous
alliance. At the beginning of the reign of King Huai of Chu (r. –), the
four major states—Chu, Qin, Qi and Wei—met and swore a non-aggression
covenant. However, in , the eastern states broke the covenant and attacked
Qin, with Chu in the lead. The alliance army entered the Hangu Pass, the
gateway to Qin, but then withdrew as they met with Qin resistance. In ,
King Hui of Qin (/–), planning to attack the far northern state of
Qi, one of Chus allies, sent his diplomat Zhang Yi (–) to Chu to
persuade Chu to break the alliance with Qi and join together with Qin.
Zhang Yi oered Chu li (about kilometers) of land in Shangyu,

Hereditary Houses

territory that Chu had long coveted. King Huai was delighted with this oer,
and then sent an ambassador to Qi to break their alliance. With that, Qi
turned around and joined Qin in an alliance against Chu. What is more,
Zhang Yi reneged on his previous oer, claiming that he had said six li, not
six hundred. In , Qin invaded Chu, ghting a major battle at Danyang,
in the Han River valley; Chu was routed, losing some eighty thousand
soldiers, seventy generals, and also its commandery in the area. With this,
King Huai mobilized his entire army to counter-attack Qin. The Chu army
reached the Wei River valley, the outskirts of the Qin capital region, but then
was repulsed. It is interesting that in the Northern Song dynasty (–1127
CE) three stones known as the Cursing Chu Prayer were unearthed in the
former territory of Qin. They had been inscribed at the time of this war
between Qin and Chu, with prayers to the Qin gods, pleading for aid in the
battle. The three stones bear almost identical inscriptions, diering only in
being addressed to three dierent gods; that to the god Jue Qiu reads as
follows:

The successor king, ruler of Qin, dares to use the Auspicious Jade and
Radiant Disk to cause Shao Gu, priest of his ancestor temple, to
proclaim and report to the illustrious great god Jue Qiu to reveal the
Chu king Xiong Xiang (i.e., King Huai of Chu)s many crimes. In the
past, our former ruler Duke Mu and King Cheng of Chu truly bound
their strength and were of the same heart, and the two countries were
as one. We were joined in marriage and conrmed through a solemn
covenant, saying for generations our myriad descendants would not
do anything to each other that was not benecial. I personally look up
to the great god Jue Qiu and pledge myself to him. Now the Chu king
Xiong Xiang is deviant and lawless, dissolute and extremely chaotic,
promotes overindulgence and intemperance, and has broken the
covenant bond. Internally he violates the innocent, murdering
pregnant women, imprisoning relatives, arresting its elders and placing
them in dungeons and cons. Externally he makes bold to change his
heart, not fearing the august heavenly high god or the great god Jue
Qius radiantly displayed awesome spirit, but turns his back on all
eighteen generations of sworn covenant, leading the troops of the
many lords to encroach upon us, wanting to despoil our gods of the
soil and to attack our hundred families, seeking to wipe out the august
heavenly high god and the great god Jue Qius temples, ritual jades,
and sacricial oerings, and so has taken our border cities Xinhuang


Chu

and Yu, Chang and Qin. I dare not say that this is permissible. Now he
again raises all of his masses and expresses his arrogance and anger,
decorates his armor and sharpens his weapons, rouses his men and
lls out his armies in order to press upon our border region, wishing
to recover what he has given us. It is for this reason that Qins multitudes
contribute their property, and the elders bring it to rescue themselves.
It is also because we have received numinous virtuous award of the
august heavenly high god and the great god Jue Qiu, that we can thwart
the Chu army, and also restore our invaded border cities. We dare to
enumerate the Chu king Xiong Xiangs turning his back on the
covenant and its curse, and inscribe it on the stone tablets in order to
make our pledge to the awesome god.

In fact, Qin once again routed Chu. Not only this, the states of Han and Wei
hearing of Chus defeat, promptly invaded Chu, forcing the Chu army to
retreat to defend its own homeland.
The next year, King Hui of Qin made a peace oering to King Huai of
Chu, oering to divide the commandery of Hanzhong that he had captured
from Chu. King Huai dismissed this oer, stating that what he really wanted
was the diplomat Zhang Yi, who had tricked him two years before. Zhang Yi
agreed to go, trusting that friends there would protect him. The king initially
wanted to kill him, but through Zhang Yis friends was bribed with land and
women and musicians to let him go. The famous poet Qu Yuan (d. –)
remonstrated with the king, but it was too late. Zhang Yi was gone, and so
too was most of Chus power. In , Qin overran most of the state, including
the capital, burning the graves of the former kings and incorporating the
territory into the expanding Qin realm. The Chu king, King Qingxiang
(r. –), escaped to Chencheng in the northeast. Although three more
generations of Chu kings were able to resist Qin, more or less, the state was
nally exterminated in .
Chu was traditionally seen as a distinct cultural entity, a view that modern
archaeology has seemed to conrm, with many discoveries from Chu tombs
showing a amboyant style of mortuary objects. This unique nature of its
culture has also been seen in the poetry of the Verses of Chu. Nevertheless,
others have argued that the dierence between Chu and cultures to the
north is more apparent than real, and that the Chu elites partook of the
greater Zhou world. It would seem that there is a basis for both of these
viewpoints: Chu culture was certainly regarded by the people of the northern
states as something dierent from their own culture, and this view was

Hereditary Houses

certainly shared by the people of Chu themselves. On the other hand, the
culture was not so very dierent as to be barbarian or non-Chinese, as
some extreme views would have it. Indeed, its contribution to Chinese
culture, which was always developing throughout this period and also
thereafter, was as strong, if not stronger, as that of any of the individual states
of the north.