CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHIES OF LAOZI
AND ZHUANGZI

Laozi is the putative author of a text known either by his own name, i.e., Laozi,
or as The Classic of the Way and Virtue. This text in some ve thousand
characters has served in turn as the most important source for the ancient
worldview known as Daoism, dao being a word the primary meanings of
which are a way (in the sense of a road) or being on the way. Daoism is
typically considered as complementary to Confucianism among native
Chinese ways of thought, or as one of the three religions of later times in China
(Buddhism joining Confucianism and Daoism during the middle ages). It is
said that the Laozi has been translated more than any text other than the
Christian Bible. Part of the reason for the hundreds of translations is because
the text is very enigmatic, such that dierent interpretations are often possible.
According to the biography provided in Records of the Historian, Laozi, the
name meaning old son, is supposed to have been born in a village called
Quren in Li prefecture of the southern state of Chu. His surname was Li, and
his given name was Er (ear); his posthumous temple name was Dan. The only
substantive thing that Sima Qian said of Laozis life is that he was a secretary in
the archives in the Zhou capital, and that he was an elder contemporary of
Confucius, so that he would have been born in the sixth century. The biography
includes a story, much repeated in other texts of the period, that Confucius
once went to the Zhou capital to ask Laozi about ritual. Laozi responded to him:

Those you talk about are all already dead and their bones have rotted.
Only their sayings remain. What is more, if a gentleman meets with the
times then he rides in a chariot; if he doesnt he just covers himself up
and walks o. I have heard that a good merchant stores away his wares
as if his store was empty, and that a gentleman of full virtue appears as
if a fool. Get rid of your haughty airs and your many desires, your
insinuating manners and your lustful ambitions; these have nothing of
benet to your person. What I have to tell you is this and nothing more.

Biographies

Figure . Han Dynasty wall carving depicting Confucius meeting Laozi; from
Jin shi suo (1821).

After taking his leave from Laozi, Confucius is supposed to have said to his
own disciples: I know that birds can y, shes can swim, and beasts can run.
What runs can be trapped, what swims can be netted, and what ies can be
shot down. But as for dragons, I dont know how they ride up into the
heavens on the wind and clouds. Today I have seen Laozi, who is just the
same as a dragon!
The only other story about Laozis life is that he is supposed to have
decided to leave China to depart for the western regions. When he arrived at
the pass, the Keeper of the Pass (Guanyinzi) asked him to write down his
philosophy before he would be allowed to exit. Laozi is supposed to have
written his book in one night, and to have departed the next day. According
to even later traditions, he underwent various metamorphoses, one of which
was to become the Buddha. Needless to say, all of this is legend without any
historical basis. In fact, many historians argue that there was no such person
as Laozi, whether named Li Er, Lao Dan, or any other name, and that the


Laozi and Zhuangzi

book Laozi is just a collection of sayings that was compiled over the course
of the Warring States period.
There was great excitement in 1993 when three separate manuscripts
dating to about BCE were discovered at Guodian, Hubei, each containing
portions of the received text of the Laozi. In China, this was generally
regarded as proof of the antiquity of the text, conrming the tradition that
Laozi lived at the time of Confucius (even if Confucius died almost two
hundred years earlier). On the other hand, in the West many scholars view
these manuscripts as evidence that even as late as there was still no
complete text of the Laozi, and that it did not achieve its nal shape until
sometime in the next century. Any conclusion to this debate will doubtless
have to await still further archaeological discoveries.
The received text of the Laozi begins with one of the most famous
passages of Chinese literature. It is usually translated more or less as follows:

The Way that can be told is not the eternal Way.
The name that can be named is not the eternal name.
The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth.
The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.

This translation (which is consistent with most Chinese understandings of
the text) introduces a paradox: if the Dao or Way that can be told of is not
the eternal Way, why then does the book go on for , characters trying to
tell of it? This too is probably a question better left to future discoveries.
The second great philosopher of Daoism was Zhuang Zhou, better known
as Zhuangzi (c. –). Little more is known about his life than is the case
for Laozi. According to his biography in Records of the Historian, Zhuangzi
was a native of Meng (near Dongming county in southwestern Shandong
province) in the state of Song, where he served at some point as an ocer in
charge of the Lacquer Garden. He is supposed to have lived at the time of
kings Hui of Liang (r. /–) and Xuan of Qi (r. –), so that he
would have been a contemporary of the Confucian philosopher Mencius
(c. –). Other information about his life derives from the book that he
is supposed to have written, usually referred to as the Zhuangzi. It is clear
from numerous anecdotes in the book that Zhuangzi was a contemporary of
Hui Shi (Huizi; c. –), another philosopher of the time who was famous
for his logical paradoxes; the two men were close friends, even if they were
often antagonists. For instance, one anecdote in the Autumn Floods chapter
of the Zhuangzi recounts that when Hui Shi was serving as prime minister of

Biographies

the state of Wei (sometime shortly after ), Zhuangzi set o to visit him.
Someone else told Hui Shi that this was because Zhuangzi wanted to replace
him as prime minister, causing Hui Shi to be agitated. When the two men
nally met, Zhuangzi used a parable to explain that he wasnt the least bit
interested in taking Hui Shis position in government.

In the south there is a bird called Yuanchu; do you know of it? The
Yuanchu starts o from the South Sea and ies to the North Sea, along
the way stopping on nothing but a catalpa tree, eating nothing but
white bamboo, and drinking nothing but sweet spring water. Once just
as the Yuanchu was passing by, there was an owl that had gotten a
rotten rat and looked up at it and yelled: Scat. Is it that you are now
scatting me on account of your state of Wei?

On another occasion, a king of Chu is said to have sent two ocers to
invite Zhuangzi to become prime minister of that state. They found Zhuangzi
shing in the Pu River. Without looking at them, Zhuangzi said:

I hear that Chu has a sacred turtle that has already been dead for three
thousand years. The king stores it in the ancestral temple, wrapped in
silk and placed in a rattan hamper. Would this turtle rather be dead
and have its bones venerated, or would it rather be alive and dragging
its tail in the mud?

When the two ocers allowed as to how the turtle would rather be alive,
Zhuangzi told them: Go away, Ill just drag my tail in the mud.
Of course, neither of these anecdotes is necessarily true. It would be
entirely in character for Zhuangzi to have made up the stories. Indeed, the
last chapter of the Zhuangzi provides brief characterizations of many of
the thinkers of his time, including also Zhuangzi himself.

Murky and without form; transforming constantly: dead or alive?
together with heaven and earth? moving with spiritual brightness?
empty, going where? forgetful, o to where? The ten thousand things
all caught up, none worth returning to—of old these were some of the
techniques of the Way. Zhuang Zhou heard their airs and delighted in
them. Using faulty reasoning, outlandish phrasing, and unbridled
words, he often let loose without care for others, and viewed things
from no particular angle. He considered all under heaven to be so


Laozi and Zhuangzi

mixed up that he couldnt use straight talk with it, so he used goblet
words as analogies, double entendre as truth, and fables to expand
upon it. Alone, he came and went with the spirit of heaven and earth,
but did not look down upon the ten thousand things, did not insist
upon right or wrong, but lived with the customs of the world. Although
his writings are but linked baubles and beads, they dont do any harm;
and although his wording is all mixed up, theres something to be seen
in it, full of stu that doesnt let o. Above he roamed with the creator,
and below he joined with those beyond life and death, taking as friends
those for whom there is no end or beginning. With respect to the root
of things, he opened it wide and spelled it out deeply; with respect to
the ancestor, he can be said to have been well attuned, following it on
high. Nevertheless, in responding to transformations and cutting
himself o from things, his reasoning was not thorough and his travels
were not unbaggaged; murky and miry, he didnt get everything.

This passage was almost certainly not written by Zhuangzi himself, but it is
not a bad characterization of his book, one that has come to be viewed as one
of Chinas great masterpieces of both literature and philosophy.