CHAPTER
BIOGRAPHY OF ZI CHAN

Gongsun Qiao, better known as Zi Chan (d. ), was one of the greatest
gures of the Springs and Autumns period. A nobleman of the state of
Zheng, a small state in northern China (centered on present-day Zhengzhou,
Henan), he was a grandson of Duke Mu of Zheng (r. –), which
explains his lineage name Gongsun (Ducal Grandson). Rising to be prime
minister of the state, he is known for his governmental reforms, for his
diplomatic skills, for his all-around common sense, and also for his good-
humored humility, all of which made him much loved by the people of
Zheng.
In the eighth century, at the beginning of the Eastern Zhou period, at a
time when the many regional states had just become independent, Zheng,
despite its small size, was an important power broker because of its
relationship with the Zhou kings. However, as the large states of Qi, Jin and
Chu began the process of absorbing smaller states, Zheng increasingly lost
inuence. Located at the crossroads of the north China plain (it is worth
noting that Zhengzhou is where the main north-south and east-west rail
lines of modern China intersect), it was constantly bueted by its larger
neighbors. Zi Chan is rst mentioned in the historical record in , when
his father was one of the generals leading the Zheng army to invade the
small state of Cai, just to the south of Zheng. Although Zheng won a great
victory, the young Zi Chan is said to have lamented that there was no greater
harm for a small state than to be known for its military prowess, that this
would surely lead to war with the larger states. The boy was admonished by
his father not to talk about the business of adults, and certainly not about
aairs of state. Nevertheless, before the year was out, the southern state of
Chu did in fact attack Zheng. When Zheng then agreed to a treaty with Chu,
in the very next year the western state of Jin also attacked it. Thereafter, Chu
attacked again, and then Jin again, Zheng being forced to trade allegiance
back and forth. This led to a decade of dictatorship in Zheng, during which
time the people of the state grew increasingly restless. Finally, in , a

Biographies

popular uprising overthrew the government, which was replaced with a new
government under the leadership of Gongsun Xia (d. ), another
nobleman; he appointed Zi Chan as his chief minister. From this time
forward, Zi Chan would be intimately involved in all aairs of the state.
Five years later, he made his entrance on the stage of inter-state diplomacy,
sending a letter to Fan Xuanzi (d. ), the prime minister of Jin who was
coercing all of Jins allies to submit ever greater amounts of tribute.
Surprisingly enough, Fan Xuanzi is said to have been pleased with Zichans
letter even though it was explicitly critical of Jin. Needless to say, Jins other
allies were pleased as well. Although it will not be possible in this brief
biography to recount all of Zichans exploits, this letter shows well his attitude
toward government and includes even a nal argument that resonates well
with todays environmental notions.

With you sir in charge of the state of Jin, the lords of the neighbors on
all four sides hear nothing of your commanding virtue, but hear
always of heavy taxation. As for me, I am perplexed by this. I have
heard that when a noble man is head of state, he is not concerned with
a lack of gifts, but only with the diculty of not having a commanding
reputation. By gathering the gifts of the many lords in your ducal
house, the lords will be of two minds, and if you rely on them, then Jin
will be of two minds. If the lords are of two minds, then Jin will be
destroyed, and if Jin is of two minds, then your own house will be
destroyed. Then what use will the gifts be. A commanding reputation
is the wagon of virtue, and virtue is the foundation of the state. With a
foundation, there will be no destruction. Shouldnt this be what you
strive for! With virtue there is happiness, and with happiness then you
can be long-lived. The Poetry says:
Happy is the noble person, The foundation of the country.
This is commanding virtue.
The God on high looks upon you, Let your heart not be of two minds.
This is a commanding reputation. If you think of others using bright
virtue, then it will carry a commanding reputation and move forward,
and in this way the distant will be drawn near and be at peace. Wouldnt
you rather have people say about you that You really give us life
instead of You mine us for your own life. That elephants lose their
bodies for their tusks is because of gifts.


Zi Chan

After this time, Zi Chan proceeded to reform Zhengs government,
establishing dierent policies for the city and for the countryside, redistributing
the land, and simplifying the taxation system. He also instituted the rst mutual
responsibility system in China, a reform that would eventually be systematized
two centuries later in the state of Qin. However, the promulgation of a written
law code was probably Zi Chans greatest governmental reform. In , he is
said to have had the states legal code cast onto bronze caldrons. This too led to
an exchange of letters between the new prime minister of Jin, Shu Xiang
(d. ), and Zi Chan. These letters also deserve quotation in full. Shu Xiang
sent the rst letter, objecting that the good working of government depends
solely on the virtue of the ruler; putting laws into writing as Zi Chan had done
eliminates the role of the ruler, which would end up making the people litigious.

Now, dear sir, as prime minister of the state of Zheng, you have created
eld-markers and ditches, established government reforms, regulated
the three statutes, and cast the law code. Will it not be dicult to pacify
the people in this way? The Poetry says:
It is proper to model the Cultured Kings virtue, Daily pacifying the
four quarters.
It also says:
A proper model was the Cultured King, The ten thousand states
trust in him.
In this way, what rule can there be! The people will know to compete
over the ne points, rejecting ritual and ghting over the wording.
With the tips of chisel and knife (i.e., sharpening their pencils), they
will compete over everything. There will be more and more disorderly
lawsuits, and bribes will be all about. By the end of your generation,
will Zheng not be defeated! I have heard When a state is about to be
lost, there will certainly be many regulations. This is what it means.

Zi Chan wrote back to him, sweetly but rmly disagreeing: It is as you have
said, sir. I am lacking in talent, and what I have done will not be able to reach
to my sons and grandsons. I have done it just to rescue this generation.
Although I cannot support your command, how would I dare to forget your
great generosity! Despite Shu Xiangs prediction that Zi Chans reforms
would bring about the destruction of his state, in fact Zheng survived for
another two centuries, outlasting even Shu Xiangs own great state of Jin.

Biographies

There are many other events in the life of Zi Chan deserving of
mention in even the briefest biography, but here I will note just two.
In , the year after his exchange of letters with Shu Xiang, Zi Chan
visited Jin on a diplomatic visit. While there, he was told that the ruler
of Jin, Duke Ping (r. –), had been suering with a serious and
prolonged illness. The local diviners identied the spirits causing the
illness as Substance Submerging and Terrace Nag, but none of them
knew who these spirits were. Zi Chan identied them as the heavenly
constellations known in the west as Scorpio and Orion, and explained their
history and signicance. But he then went on to say that these spirits had
nothing to do with Duke Pings illness. Rather, he was suering from an
over-indulgence in sex.

As for milords body, this is a matter of his going out and in, drinking
and eating, and his sorrows and pleasures; what do the spirits of the
mountains and rivers, stars and constellations have to do with it! I
have heard that a ruler has four time-periods: in the morning he hears
court, in the afternoon he holds interviews, in the evening he polishes
his commands, and at night he rests his body. In this, he regulates and
distributes his breath, not allowing it to be blocked up or dissipated to
harm his body, so that his heart is not sickened, throwing his hundred
degrees into disorder. Now is it not that he focuses on just one of
these? That is why he has become ill.

In that same year, back in his home state, there was a rumor running
rampant among the common people that someone had seen the ghost of
Liang Xiao (d. ), one of the dictators who had previously ruled Zheng but
whose ministers put to death after he tried to re-enter the state after eeing
in exile. When predictions that two dierent men would be killed on
particular days proved to be true, the people became hysterical, believing
that it was the work of the ghost. Zi Chan, now in charge of the government,
appointed Liang Xiaos son and the son of yet another dictator, Zi Kong
(d. ), who had also been executed, to calm the ghost; thereafter the
sightings—and the hysteria—stopped. When asked why he had done this, he
replied as the astute politician that he was:

I did it to please them. As people, those two were without propriety
and interested only in pleasure. But those in charge of government
sometimes go against the rules just to curry favor with the people. If


Zi Chan

we didnt curry favor with them, the people wouldnt have trust in us,
and if they didnt have trust in us, they wouldnt follow us.

Unusual among the political gures of ancient China, Zi Chan died a
natural death, in the year . His parting advice to his successor in charge
of government was:

Only someone of virtue is able to control the people with leniency.
Next best is harshness. When the people see the ames of a re they
are afraid, and so few die from it. However, because water is soft and
yielding, the people draw near to it and play around, and so many die
in it. Thus, it is more dicult to be lenient.

He was unusual too in having virtue. Perhaps that is still the case.