CHAPTER
ESSAY ON GOVERNMENT

There is very little that can be said of the earliest forms of government in
China. Of course, there are legends that the sage-kings Yao and Shun ruled
through force of personal character, and that when they reached old age they
abdicated in favor of their most worthy ministers, Shun in the case of Yao, and
Yu the Great in the case of Shun. These legends say that Yu too attempted to
abdicate, but in the end was succeeded by his son Qi, thus initiating the Xia
dynasty and Chinas pattern of kingship passing from father to son. Traditional
histories—and some modern ones too—try to ll in the blanks of this period
by analogy with later times, but there would seem to be little point in this.
Even when we enter the historical age proper during the late Shang
dynasty, not much more can be said about the government, notwithstanding
the tens of thousands of oracle-bone records. It is possible on the basis of
these records to deduce the genealogy of the kings of the entire dynasty, and
not just of the nine kings for which time written records exist, and it seems
likely that these kings did wield ultimate power—at least within their own
limited spheres of inuence. The king about whom we know the most, Wu
Ding (r. c. 1225–1189), seems to have ruled together with royal family
members, primarily princes and a shifting confederation of allied states,
and was able to raise troops and to call on ocers known as the Many
Artisans and Many Horse, perhaps in charge of labor and the military
respectively. He also had scores of diviners in his service, divination being
one of the important royal activities. Many craftsmen worked in special
workshops throughout the capital, doubtless through royal patronage,
specializing in bronze-casting, pottery making, and bone-working. What is
more, by at least one count Wu Ding had available to him as many as eighty-
four dierent consorts, who presumably served to consolidate the political
confederation that he had established. Most of these women came from
other states or other peoples, and sometimes it is even possible to suggest
where their homes may have been located. However, nothing more can be
said about those states, and traditional Chinese views of history do not

Essays

consider them to have been Chinese, even though they were all assuredly
located within the greater North China plain.
It is only with the Zhou dynasty, which overthrew the Shang in 1045, that
it becomes possible to describe something of the government organization.
The Zhou government, apparently like the Xia and Shang governments before
it, was centered upon the king. At the beginning of the dynasty, the Zhou
seem to have largely followed the Shang model, though they did so more
systematically, deputing royal princes and relatives to oversee the eastern
lands that they had just conquered. This is often referred to as a form of
feudalism, in which these royal princes and relatives owed fealty and tribute
to the Zhou king, but were free to govern their own individual territories.
Shortly after the establishment of the dynasty, the Zhou developed a
doctrine which held that the king ruled by divine right; this is usually
referred to as the Mandate of Heaven, the Zhou king being referred to as the
Son of Heaven. The earliest explicit reference to this doctrine, at least in
paleographic sources that date to the period, is seen in the inscription on the
Da Yu ding, one of the most important bronze inscriptions from the rst half
of the Western Zhou. It begins:

It was the ninth month; the king was at Ancestral Zhou and
commanded Yu. The king approved of saying: Yu, illustrious King
Wen received the Heaven-blessed great mandate. At (the time) King
Wu succeeded Wen and made the state, (he) ridded it of evil, extended
it over the four quarters, and governed their people. Among the
managers of aairs, he suppressed wine; none dared to get ushed.
Having oerings and sacrices, none dared to get sloshed. Therefore,
heaven respectfully looked upon him and treated (him) as a son, and
greatly protected the former kings . . . to have the four quarters.

The inscription goes on to commemorate Yus appointment to stand beside
the king:

You early had great service. It was when I had assumed my elementary
education; you did not press me, your ruler, the one man. Now it is that
I assume the model and follow King Wens upright virtue, and as King
Wen commanded the two and three governors, now it is that I
command you, Yu, to assist Rong respectfully to secure virtues
continuance. Diligently morning and evening enter to remonstrate,
and making oerings hasten to be awed by heavens awesomeness. The


Government

king said,Wuhu! (I) command you, Yu, to take as model your ancestral
grandfather Duke Nan. The king said, Yu, then assist and stand beside
me, overseeing the Supervisors of the Military. Be diligent and quick
in punishments and law-suits; morning and evening assist me, the one
man, to uphold the four quarters and when I inspect the people and
borderlands received by the former kings.

Concomitant with the Mandate of Heaven in which the king was regarded
as the son of heaven, it is important to recognize that the Zhou government
was based upon kinship, just as Yu here is commanded to take as your
model your ancestral grandfather Duke Nan. The ancestral temple was the
focal point of the royal family, to be sure, but also of all of the dierent
families and lineages that made up the state. It was not only where the
important bronze vessels were kept and where oerings to the ancestors
were made, but also where much of the government administration was
conducted. Kinship would continue to be the foundation of that government
for at least the next half a millennium.
Within the royal domain itself, essentially centered on the two capitals at
modern-day Xian, Shaanxi, and Luoyang, Henan, early Zhou rule seems to
have been relatively ad hoc, what Max Weber characterized as a patriarchal
form of government, in which a few close advisers to the king attended to
whatever business was required, whether civil or martial (if such a distinction
even made sense at the time). This pattern began to change by the beginning
of the second century of Zhou rule, when King Mu (r. –) undertook
rst to reorganize the military, appointing ocers of xed rank, with some
indication of an explicit chain of command. Little by little, whether during the
reign of King Mu himself or those of his immediate successors, this structure
was extended to include also civil ocers. There were three main divisions of
the government, under the Supervisors of the Horse, Labor, and Lands. There
was also a royal secretariat, responsible for communicating the kings
commands and for maintaining written records. There is some indication
that local jurisdictions mirrored this bureaucratic structure to some extent. It
is also at the time of King Mu that later tradition says a written law code was
rst promulgated, but the text cited as evidence of this, the Punishments of
L chapter of the Exalted Scriptures is almost certainly from a later date.
Inscribed bronze vessels that provide the best evidence that we have for
the later Western Zhou government show that the incipient bureaucracy
established at this time persisted, at least in the capital regions. There is less
evidence to know how the areas beyond the capitals were governed. There is

Essays

little evidence that the rulers of these erstwhile colonies reported back to the
king as feudal bonds would have required them to do, though marriage
bonds were continued between the royal family and the rulers of the colonies
founded by non-Zhou allies, such as the state of Qi, which had been
established under the Grand Duke Wang, a member of the Jiang family and
the leader of the Zhou army during its conquest of Shang. The only evidence
that the Zhou king entered into the aairs of any of the local states came in
the 860s when King Yi (r. –) sent a royal army into Qi, and then in the
810s when King Xuan (r. –) intruded in the succession of Lu. Both of
these interventions seem to have been counter-productive, the intervention
in Lu ultimately ending up destabilizing that state. The other states apparently
went their own way. By the time the Western Zhou came to an end in ,
these states were already practically independent, a status that would soon
be recognized by the weakened Zhou kings in their new capital at Luoyang.
The rst important development in government of the subsequent
Springs and Autumns period took place in the state of Qi, just about one
hundred years after the end of the Western Zhou. There are two features of
geography which, added to Qis non-Zhou heritage, may have contributed to
it introducing innovations in government sooner than the other independent
states. First, Qi occupied most of the Shandong peninsula, far to the northeast
of even the eastern Zhou capital at Luoyang, and also more or less isolated
from most of the other eastern states. Second, and perhaps more important,
Qi was one of the larger states, encompassing a varied topography; it
stretched from marine salt ats along its eastern seaboard to fertile plains in
its northwest and mountains in the southwest. These dierent zones
supported dierent life-styles and required dierent local governance. At the
time of Duke Huan (r. –), Qi experimented with a new government
structure. The state was divided into seven counties (xian), each of which
was sub-divided into three districts (xiang), thus making for twenty-one
districts in all. The word xian for county means to suspend, and suggests
individual threads hanging from a central support. Each of these counties
and districts was administered by its own ocers, and each had its own tax
burden and requirement to contribute men to the army. At least in theory,
the ocers were to be judged on the basis of performance, and to be
promoted or demoted accordingly. This structure, generally credited to
Duke Huans chief minister Guan Zhong (c. –), made Qi the most
powerful state of the time. Duke Huan was recognized by the Zhou king and
the rulers of the other states as ba, a term often translated as hegemon, but
which probably originally meant senior or elder in the sense of the rst


Government

born within a generation. Thus, the ba was the rst among equals; i.e.,
premier. According to the kinship principles underlying the Zhou political
structure, ctive though the relationships may have been, the ba was thus the
primary support and protector of the Zhou king.
Qis administrative structure based on counties quickly spread to the
other states of the time, especially the large states of Qin, Chu and Jin. There
is some evidence that at almost the same time as in Qi, the state of Qin made
counties of four newly conquered territories, but this seems not to have been
extended throughout the entirety of that state. Somewhat later, the southern
state of Chu also made newly conquered lands into counties, and then
expanded the system to encompass the entire state. The state of Jin also
adopted the county system beginning about the time of Duke Wen (r. –
). A century later it is said to have had forty-nine separate counties, each
of which was tasked with contributing one hundred chariots to the states
combined military force, suggesting that these reforms involved both civil
and military administration.
As the large states gradually absorbed smaller states, and as they sought
new ways to integrate these new territories into their own government
structure, they also realized that those structures required reorganization.
For instance, in , Jin reorganized its military, reassigning the commanders.
One of the commanders, Zhao Dun (also known as Zhao Xuanzi; d. ),
who had traveled with the previous ruler Duke Wen during his long exile,
was praised as being especially capable; this capability was identied as the
benet of the state. For this reason, Zhao Dun was put in charge of the Jin
government, a major new development; after this time, although states
continued to be ruled by the nobility, the administration would be in the
hands of prime ministers, who could be either noblemen themselves or,
more and more, commoners. According to the Zuo Tradition, Zhao Dun
immediately set about producing statutes; rectifying laws and crimes;
handling lawsuits and punishments; directing the pursuit of those who had
absconded and instituting the use of pledges and contracts; putting in order
the old and stagnant, and ranks based on ritual; extending regular oces
and bringing out those who had been obstructed or were in obscurity.
When he had completed these reforms, he commanded that they be put in
practice throughout the state of Jin as constant laws.
The promulgation of constant laws—or at least of a written law code—is
often credited to—or blamed upon—Zi Chan (also known as Gongsun Qiao;
d. ), a minister active in the government of the state of Zheng. In , he
is said to have had the states legal code cast onto a bronze caldron or caldrons.

Essays

According to the Zuo Tradition, the prime minister of Jin, Shu Xiang
(d. c. ), objected to this act, sending Zi Chan a lengthy letter in which he
argued that from ancient times the good working of the government
depended solely on the virtue of the ruler. By putting laws into writing, as Zi
Chan had done, this would eliminate the role of the ruler, and would end up
making the people litigious. Shu Xiang ended the letter predicting that Zi
Chan would bring his state of Zheng to ruin. Despite this prediction, twenty-
three years later, generals of Jin would cast a similar caldron, though this one
of iron, inscribed with their own penal code, an act for which they were in
turn criticized by none other than Confucius (–). What is more, far
from bringing Zheng to ruin, Zi Chans reforms were quite successful. When
he assumed control of Zheng, it had long since ceased to be an important
state. However, even though it was located at the very crossroads of the central
China plain, with enemies all about, his reforms succeeded in strengthening
the state suciently that it managed to outlive even the great state of Jin.
Zhao Duns promotion from a military leader to having responsibility for
the entire government was not unusual, much of the reorganization of the
governments at this period coming about as a result of changes in warfare
and military thinking. Many of these were driven in turn by technological
changes. The sixth century BCE saw the denitive onset of the Iron Age in
China. While bronze had long been used for ritual goods, now iron tools and
weapons began to be available on a wide scale. One tool in particular brought
about important demographic changes: the ox-drawn iron-bladed plow
allowed new lands to be opened and old lands to be furrowed more deeply
and more eectively than theretofore, greatly increasing crop yields; this
quickly led to a substantial increase in population, which in turn allowed the
increasingly larger states to muster ever larger armies. These larger armies
were outtted with iron weapons that were both less expensive to produce
and more eective than bronze weapons. Among these weapons was the
newly invented mechanical crossbow, with a mass-produced trigger
mechanism. The crossbow required much less training for the masses of new
soldiers to master than had been the case with the traditional reex bow. Not
only this, it was lethal at far greater distances than the reex bow, and it soon
rendered the horse-drawn chariot obsolete; drivers and the warriors on the
chariots could be killed at a distance before they ever threatened the ranks of
infantry. From this time on, instead of battles featuring perhaps a thousand
or so chariots, each carrying three elite and highly trained warriors (the
driver, the archer, and a defender bearing a dagger-axe), armies—reaching
into the hundreds of thousands of soldiers—now consisted primarily of


Government

foot-soldiers, control of which was entrusted to expert generals such as
Sunzi, the author of The Art of War.
While The Art of War includes some discussion of battleeld tactics, the
great majority of the book concerns the administration of the state and the
logistical demands of getting armies to the battleeld and keeping them
there. These concerns were shared with the civil administration, which was
charged with maximizing agricultural production to support the armies.
When the rst treatises of government were written, toward the beginning of
the fourth century, agriculture and warfare would come to be seen as the two
handles of government. The rst of these treatises, unfortunately long since
lost, is said to have been the Classic of Laws by Li Kui (–). Li Kui was
appointed prime minister of Wei in , under that states founding ruler,
Lord Wen of Wei (r. –). While the book did, to be sure, contain a
written law code that would serve as the basis for the later Qin and then Han
law codes, much of it was devoted to the topic of agriculture. Li Kui apparently
argued that the traditional system of manorial lands belonging to noblemen
and worked by quasi serfs was inecient, and should be replaced by small-
scale farms worked by single families. Two other policies would also have
profound and long-lasting inuence, and not just in the state of Wei. The rst
of these was his Law of Even Grain Prices, by which the state would buy
grain in good years to store in state granaries, to be released in years of
famine, thus stabilizing the price of grain and ensuring farmers a steady
market for their goods. Some , years later, this policy would be adopted
in the United States under President Franklin Delano Roosevelts Secretary
of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace (1888–1965; Secretary of Agriculture 1933–
1940), establishing what he called the Ever Normal Granary, a series of price
supports that has since been adopted throughout the world. The second of Li
Kuis inuential policies was his insistence on merit in the selection of
ocials. This too was taken up well beyond just the state of Wei. Just as the
armies required specialists to be able to arm, to feed, and to control the
masses of new soldiers, so too did the civilian governments require specialists
to keep track of the people living under their charge, and to extract from
them the requisite tax and labor to support the armies. In the states of Chu
and Qin, the newly established counties came to be headed by governors
who were drawn not from the nobility of the state but rather were chosen on
the basis of their ability. This turn from noble rank to recognition by ability
was reected also in the philosophical writings of the time. A set of chapters
of the Mozi was entitled Exalting the Worthy (Shang xian), a term also
consistent with the views of Confucius (–) and his followers.

Essays

It is said that a half century after Li Kui wrote his Classic of Laws, the book
was carried by Shang Yang (c. –) when he left Wei to go to Qin. Shang
Yang, the putative author of the Book of the Lord Shang, is probably most
remembered for the establishment of what came to be called Legalism, and
for his strict enforcement of laws in the state of Qin. However, he was also
instrumental in using the reins of government to develop agriculture, and
stang that government with a bureaucracy chosen for its skills, rather than
its noble pedigree. The entire population was registered, and adult males
were individually responsible for a household tax or head tax. On the other
hand, the population was organized into anity groups of ve, ten, and fty
households. He also instituted a policy whereby members of these anity
groups had responsibility for each others conduct. If any single individual
committed a crime, the entire group was responsible for reporting the
infraction, and the property of the criminal would be conscated and shared
with the other members of the group. The military was organized in a similar
fashion, with members of the unit mutually sharing in its success, or being
similarly punished for its failure. These reforms quickly made Qin the
strongest state of all the remaining independent states, with security within
and military power brought to bear against those other states.
Qins nearest neighbor to the east was the state of Han, one of the three
successor states to the former great state of Jin. At the same time that Shang
Yang was chancellor of Qin, the Han government was administered by a
man named Shen Buhai (d. ). He contributed notions of bureaucracy to
the theory of government known as Legalism, stressing the need for
impersonal—and thus impartial—rule. He argued that since it is impossible
for a ruler to know all of his subjects personally, it is necessary for him to
group them into classes and deal with them through ocials. On the other
hand, the ruler must never allow any one ocial to become too powerful.
Shen Buhai likened the government to a wheel: the ruler was the hub, empty
and essentially motionless, while the many ministers should act together
like the spokes. One important innovation of this bureaucratic model is that
ocials were paid a salary for their service rather than living o the labor of
peasants attached to awards of land; the amount of salary paid came to
indicate the rank of the ocial. This innovation was soon adopted by all of
the other states as well. For instance, by the late third century, the state of Qin
extended this salary system to all government employees. Among the
government records written on bamboo strips and found in 1975 at Shuihudi,
Hubei is the following instruction:


Government

Government secretaries and runners receive a half bushel of polished
grain, a quarter pint of sauce, and leeks and onions for soup. Those of
the fth rank and above are fed according to their rank. Relatives of
runners receive a half bushel of husked grain, while servants receive a
third of a bushel.

Over the next century, the various states competed with each other to
attract the most qualied ocials and generals, who traveled from state to
state oering their services. However, it was the state of Qin that implemented
Legalist policies most eectively and became the preeminent power,
eventually conquering all of the other states and unifying the empire. In ,
after completing the conquest, the First Emperor of Qin (r. /–)
convened a meeting of his principal advisers to consider how to rule the vast
newly conquered lands. Most of the advisers recommended looking to the
past for precedent—to the early Zhou dynasty when royal relatives were
deputed to rule over the territories. However, one adviser, Li Si (c. –),
argued against this policy, and recommended that these newly conquered
territories should also be ruled from the capital, in the same way as the
territory of Qin had been ruled. Accepting this argument, the First Emperor
divided the land into thirty-six commanderies (jun). Fully half of these had
previously existed as commanderies, six in Qin itself, and twelve others in
the various conquered states. This was an administrative structure that has
remained in place, at least in principle, down to the present day.
It is now possible to see how the administration of this vast empire
worked. In 2002, archaeologists in the city of Liye, Hunan discovered some
, bamboo strips that had been deposited in a well at the end of the Qin
dynasty. This is now regarded as the most important archaeological discovery
of Qin remains after only the discovery of the terracotta warriors buried
near the tomb of the First Emperor. During the Qin dynasty, Liye was the
county seat of Qianling county of Dongting commandery, and these strips
constituted part of the archive of the local government. They demonstrate a
great deal of detail about that local government, but perhaps most important
they also show how the imperial government functioned. Laws and edicts
were promulgated in the capital, and copies were sent to each of the
commanderies, which in turn were required to send copies to each county in
its jurisdiction, and so on even to areas below the county level. This required
an enormous bureaucracy, which was one of the Qin governments greatest
legacies to later Chinese civilization. The empire was conquered by the
sword, but it was ruled by the writing brush.