CHAPTER
ESSAY ON RITUAL

A famous statement in the Zuo Tradition says that The great aairs of state
are ritual and warfare. Warfare would seem to need no denition; it will be
the subject of the next chapter. However, central as ritual was to early
Chinese civilization, it may be a concept more or less foreign to modern
readers; in any event, our modern understanding of ritual is not nearly as
expansive as was that of ancient China. Ritual (li) of course had to do with
the various activities that we normally consider as religious: in ancient China
these often centered on prayers and oerings to the ancestors. These involved
great expenditures of wealth, both for the production of the implements of
ritual—especially the tens of thousands of bronze vessels made to hold the
oerings, and also for the oerings themselves, primarily meat and grain,
but also such luxury items as silk and jade. Other oerings were made to a
vast array of gods and in conjunction with almost every facet of life: when
constructing a building, when setting out on a journey, when aicted with a
toothache, and also both before and after battles. Indeed, the ritual of the
great aairs of state probably concerns primarily the religious activities
surrounding warfare. Nevertheless, it is not wrong to take the broadest
possible view of ritual. By the end of the period under consideration in this
book, the notion of ritual had expanded to encompass everything that is
right and proper in civilization. The Confucian philosopher Xunzi (c. –
) equated ritual with morality:

One may ask what is the origin of ritual? I say: Man is born with
desires, and if he desires something and doesnt get it, hell be unable
to stop from seeking it. If there are no limits or degrees to his seeking,
then hell be unable to stop from ghting for it. With ghting then
there is disorder, and with disorder then there is impoverishment. The
past kings hated disorder, and therefore established ritual propriety to
keep them apart, and to provide for mens desires and what they seek.
They made it so that desires did not impoverish things, and that things

Essays

did not extend beyond the desires, the two being held in a steady
equilibrium. This is the origin of ritual.

In this view, ritual is what made civilization possible.
For Xunzi, the past kings would refer rst and foremost to Yao and Shun,
prior to the time of dynastic rule. However, while most of the thinkers of the
Warring States period did indeed attribute the origins of ritual to Yao and
Shun, there is very little in either the historical or the archaeological record
with which to trace this. Instead, it is with the inscriptions on the oracle bones
and bronze vessels of the late Shang dynasty with which we can properly begin.
The oracle-bone inscriptions reveal that the Shang kings—or at least the last
nine of them beginning with King Wu Ding (r. c. 1225–1189)—performed
divinations before undertaking almost any activity. This was certainly true of
Wu Ding, the topics he divined about including the weather, the harvest, birth-
giving of wives, illnesses of various kinds, warfare, the kings own travels, and
so on. These divinations were prayers that the activity that the king proposed
to undertake would be successful. Divinations made use of the plastrons of
turtles (i.e., the at underbelly of the turtle) or scapula bones of oxen (while the
scapula bone in humans is the pair of thin-bladed bones in the back, in an ox
it is the wide bone that runs down the two front legs, essentially the thigh-
bone), presumably with the understanding that they would serve as messengers
to the ancestors and the spirit world being petitioned. The bone or shell was
prepared with a series of hollows. At the time of divination, a hot brand was
placed into the hollow, causing a stress crack to appear on the opposite side; it
was this crack that was interpreted to be the answer to the divination.
The divination itself was presented as a command to the turtle. When the
Shang oracle bones were rst discovered, at the turn of the nineteenth century,
and for many scholars still today, these commands were understood as questions;
after all, how else might one conduct a divination? And there is classical support
for this view, with one denition of divination being that it is to resolve doubts.
Thus, according to this interpretation, the most common type of divination,
which simply concerns the next week, should be understood as:

Divining: Will the (next) ten-day week be without misfortune?

Nevertheless, most Western scholars of oracle-bone inscriptions now argue
that the commands are expressed both grammatically and conceptually as
statements, and should be understood as statements of desire. According to this
view of divination, the weekly inscription should be understood instead as:


Ritual

Armed: The (next) ten-day will be without misfortune.

Rather than open-ended inquiries about future events, this would be a
prayer that those events would transpire as desired. Later records of
divination from throughout the Zhou dynasty have demonstrated that this
view of divination is almost certainly correct. It was one of the most basic
rituals entailing communication between the king—as a representative of
the people—and the ancestors.
Regardless of which interpretation of divination during the Shang
dynasty one might adopt, there is no question that Shang religion was
primarily a family aair. Not only was divination directed toward the kings
ancestors, but so too were the oerings, which divinations show were made
in great profusion. With only a few exceptions, these oerings could only be
made by the king or by members of the royal family. The high god of the
Shang pantheon, Di on High (Shang Di), was apparently conceived of as a
high ancestor, or perhaps a corporate notion of the ancestors collectively.
Bronze inscriptions, which began to appear toward the end of the Shang
dynasty, show that other individuals as well worshipped their own ancestors,
directing sacrices to them just as the royal family did to its ancestors.
When the Zhou conquered Shang in 1045, they introduced a new high
god: Heaven (Tian). This may reect a religious inuence from Central Asia,
but it would seem that there was also a political motivation behind it. Just as
the arc of heaven covers all under it, so too was the god Heaven conceived of
as covering all people, not just the royal family as in the case of Di. The Zhou
king soon came to be called the Son of Heaven (Tianzi). Although King Wen,
the Cultured King (r. 1099/1056–1050), had died before the Zhou conquest,
he was regarded as the royal familys high ancestor. As subsequent kings died
one after the other, they were installed in an ever-expanding ancestral
temple, to the left and right in alternating generations. Both the earliest
poems in the Classic of Poetry and bronze inscriptions from the period show
this ancestral temple to have been the focal point of much of Zhou life—
both religious and political. One simple hymn, It is the Command of
Heaven, shows well the relationship between Heaven and King Wen.

It is the command of Heaven; Oh so stately, never ending.
Wuhu! Illustrious, Is the purity of the Cultured Kings virtue.
Enter and shower upon us, That we may receive it.
Grandly favor us, oh Cultured King, May your grandchildren make it
strong.

Essays

Figure . Altar set from early Western Zhou dynasty; Metropolitan Museum of
New York ..–.

At the beginning of the Western Zhou period, the royal family, as indeed
other families as well, was still a rather close-knit unit, with a limited number
of members living in the capital. Bronze vessels from that time suggest that
the focus of the temple was a small altar, on which was placed all of the
vessels—primarily wine vessels—used in the sacrice. One example of such
an altar is housed in the Metropolitan Museum of New York; another was
unearthed recently at Shigushan, near the city of Baoji, Shaanxi.
It is likely that all the male members of the family would have gathered
together around this altar to celebrate the oering jointly. An interesting
insight has been suggested by Jessica Rawson, former keeper of the British
Museum in London: the extraordinarily detailed ornamentation on early
Western Zhou bronzes reveal more and more the closer one inspects them.
This would have had the eect of drawing the concelebrants of these
oerings to gather around the altar. Another hymn from the Classic of Poetry
describes the scene, as they sung in unison; it is entitled We Oer.

We oer, we sacrice, They are sheep, they are cows.
May it be that heaven accepts them.
It is proper that we model the Cultured Kings statutes,
Daily making tranquil the four quarters.
And so the blessed Cultured King, Has now received and enjoyed
them.


Ritual

May we from morning until night
Stand in awe of Heavens might, And protect it here and now.

As time passed and the royal family expanded and dispersed, it would
have become more and more dicult for the entire family to join together in
this way around a single altar. By the middle of the Western Zhou, about ,
there was a dramatic change in the number and style of bronzes that were
placed in the ancestral temple. Although many bronzes have been unearthed
from tombs, and therefore presumably reect the mortuary context, there
have been other discoveries of caches of bronzes, mainly in the Zhou
homeland—known as the Zhouyuan—located between the modern cities of
Xian and Baoji, that provide evidence of the bronzes that would have been
used in the ancestral temples. The bronze vessels were deposited in these
caches for safekeeping at the very end of the Western Zhou when the Zhou
homeland was being overrun by foreign invaders; the bronzes in them
almost certainly had been those used in the ancestral temples, and so provide
evidence of how rituals in the temples were performed. Once such cache was
unearthed in 1975 at the village of Zhuangbai in the Zhouyuan. It held
bronze pieces in all, from at least ve generations of a single family, the Wei
family. Forty-four of these vessels and bells were produced for a single
generation of this family, a man named Xing, who lived in the rst half of the
ninth century. Fig. . shows most of these. There are two things in
particular to note about this collection. First, at the top of the gure are eight
tureens (gui), which were used to make grain oerings. These eight tureens
are virtually identical, and the ornamentation on them is also quite uniform;
there is nothing in particular about the dcor that would draw one closer to
look at it. Indeed, we can imagine that all eight vessels would have been
arrayed across one side of a very long altar, as they are often displayed in
Chinese museums with complete sets. Although not included among Xings
bronzes, it is almost certain that these tureens would have been complemented
on the other side of the altar with nine caldrons (ding), similarly arrayed. The
second thing to note about the bronzes from this cache is the many bells at
the bottom of the gure. Bells were rst made in southern China, and were
introduced to the Zhou homeland only a century or so before the time of
these bells made for Xing. Ancient Chinese bells produced two separate
tones an octave apart, but a single bell could not be used for a musical
performance. It was necessary to have an array of bells of dierent sizes,
which would produce dierent notes. Usually these arrays were in multiples
of four bells. They would have been suspended from a rack placed to one

Essays

side of the altar. Not gured here, but certainly present on the other side of
the altar would have been a similar rack of chime-stones, also graduated in
size so as to produce dierent notes. It was doubtless the need to make these
musical instruments in sets that suggested to the Zhou people of the time
that their oering vessels might also be cast in sets.
Visualizing the ancestral temple from which this collection would have
come will suggest two further deductions about how the oerings to the
ancestors in it were doubtless performed. First, playing the bells and chime-
stones was not just a matter of striking them; they had to be struck at exact
points, producing dierent notes. This was not something that just any
member of the family could do. It required specially trained musicians.
Second, the array of tureens and caldrons would have stretched across an
altar twenty meters or more long, far too long for the members of the family

Figure . Bronzes of Wei Bo Xing, from Zhuangbai, Shaanxi; c. ; from Jessica
Rawson, Western Zhou Archaeology, in Michael Loewe and Edward L. Shaughnessy
ed., The Cambridge History of Ancient China: From the Beginnings of Civilization to
B.C. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999), Fig. .; drawing by Ann
Searight; used with permission.


Ritual

to gather around. What is more, the closer to the altar those family members
would draw, the less they would see; one would have to stand at a distance in
order to take in the entire scene. This suggests that specially trained priests
would have stood at the altar performing the oerings on behalf of the
family. This is a radically dierent conception of ritual, so dierent that it has
come to be termed the Western Zhou Ritual Reform (in fact, some have
termed it a Ritual Revolution). Another hymn from the Classic of Poetry
seems to date from after this Ritual Reform. Called Now Presenting, it
describes the reformed concelebration of the ancestral sacrices.

Now visiting the serving king, Seeking out his insignia:
Dragon banners all autter, Harmonic bells all resounding.
The bridles leather has gilding, Resplendent with valiant brilliance.
Led to visit the shining father, To be lial, to make oering,
To strengthen longevity, Forever going to protect them.
May the august grant many blessings; Valiant and cultured serving
lords
Succor us with many blessings. Giving continued splendor in pure
grace.

No one, not even the Zhou kings (perhaps especially not the Zhou kings),
was exempt from obligations to his ancestors. One of the very few bronze
vessels made on behalf of a reigning Zhou king illustrates well the continuing
relationship with ones ancestors. This vessel, the Hu gui, discovered in 1980,
was made for King Li (r. /–/), who refers to himself in the
inscription by his personal name Hu. The inscription includes a long prayer
to his ancestors (curiously stating that they lived in the court of the god Di,
normally associated with the ancestors of the Shang royal family).

Hu makes (this) giant sacricial treasured gui-tureen, with which
vigorously to aid my august cultured and valorous grandfather and
deceased father. May they approach the prior cultured men, may they
constantly be in the court of Di on High, ascending and descending,
continuously visited with the august Di on Highs great and felicitous
mandate, with which commandingly to protect our family, my position
and Hus person.

For King Li and others in the Western Zhou dynasty, the key word was
xiao, which originally referred to the oerings to the ancestors and the

Essays

relationship between a son and his deceased father. However, by the time of
Confucius, xiao had developed into perhaps the core Confucian virtue,
typically translated as lial piety. For Confucius, this went well beyond just
supplying oerings to the ancestors, or even to ones parents while they were
still alive. Instead, it was conceived of as a psychological attitude, as the
following quotation of Confucius shows.

Zi You asked about lial piety. The Master said, Nowadays it is those
who are able to provide (for their parents) that are said to be lial.
Even dogs and horses can be provided for. If not with respect, how is it
any dierent?

Another aspect of lial piety and ritual practice involved the need for a son
to mourn the death of his father for three full years.

The Master said, If, for three years, one does not diverge from his
fathers way, he can be said to be lial.

At the beginning of this essay, I quoted the Confucian philosopher Xunzi
as theorizing that ritual was established to divide people into their proper
roles in society. This ritual system conceived of the family as the basis of
society, which was established in the rst place by the bond between father
and son. This three-year mourning period, during which a son was to retire
from active life and live a life devoid of all social adornment—wearing
mourning garments, living in a grass hut, eating coarse porridge, sleeping on
a mat of twigs with a clump of earth as a pillow—may sound excessive, but
according to Xunzi twenty-ve months of mourning was moderate.

One may ask what is the three-year mourning period? I say: It is a
cultural pattern set up on the basis of weighing the emotions. It is
designed to show that one belongs to the group and to distinguish
between those near and far, honored and humble; it cannot be
increased or decreased. That is why it is said that it cannot be avoided
or changed. When a wound is deep, it takes many days to heal; where
there is great pain, it is slow to get better. That the three-year mourning
period is a cultural pattern set up on the basis of weighing the emotions
is because it is the extreme of pain. The mourning garments and the
cane of the mourner, the hut where he lives, the gruel he eats, the mat
of twigs and pillow of earth, these show the intense pain of his grief.


Ritual

The three-year mourning period is over in twenty-ve months; though
the grief and pain are not yet gone and ones thoughts of the departed
are not yet forgotten, still the ritual stops it at this. Could it be that
seeing o the dead would end, but we return to life in moderation.

As the other statement quoted at the beginning of this essay said, ritual
was indeed one of the great aairs of state.