CHAPTER
ESSAY ON LITERATURE

Since the Han dynasty, the Classic of Changes (Yi jing), also known as the
Zhou Changes (Zhou Yi) has been ranked as the rst of the Chinese classics.
Originally written and used as a manual of divination, by the Warring States
period thinkers had transformed it into a text of natural philosophy and
wisdom. It is composed of two parts: the rst part has sixty-four brief texts
arranged around hexagrams (symbols made up of six lines, either solid or
broken), while the second part is a series of commentaries that explain the
meaning of the text.
Legge, James. The Yi King. Volume of The Sacred Books of China: The Texts of
Confucianism. 2nd edition. The Sacred Books of the East . Oxford: Clarendon,
1879.
Wilhelm, Richard. The I Ching or Book of Changes. Translated into English by Cary
F. Baynes. Introduction by Carl G. Jung. Bollingen Series . Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1950.
Rutt, Richard. The Book of Changes (Zhouyi): A Bronze Age Document. Richmond:
Curzon, 1996.
Shaughnessy, Edward L. Unearthing the Changes: Recently Discovered Manuscripts
of the Yi jing (I ching) and Related Texts. Translations from the Asian Classics.
New York: Columbia University Press, 2014.
Takashima, Ken-ichi. Studies of Fascicle Three of Inscriptions from the Yin Ruins.
vols. Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinica, Special Publications
. Taipei, 2010.
Schwartz, Adam C. The Oracle Bone Inscriptions from Huayuanzhuang East:
Translated with an Introduction and Commentary. Library of Sinology .
Mouton: DE Gruyter, 2020.
Cook, Constance A. and Zhao Lu. Stalk Divination: A Newly Discovered Alternative
to the I Ching. New York: Oxford U. Press, 2017.
Harper, Donald. A Chinese Demonology of the Third Century B.C. Harvard
Journal of Asiatic Studies . (1985): –.

The Classic of Scriptures (Shu jing), also known as the Exalted Scriptures (Shang
shu), purports to include the earliest writings in the Chinese literary tradition,
stretching from the time of Yao and Shun through the early Springs and

Essays

Autumns period. It is supposed to have included one hundred texts, selected by
Confucius from among all ancient texts as the most important texts.
Unfortunately, most of these were subsequently lost, with only twenty-eight
chapters reconstituted during the early Han dynasty. Later, in the early fourth
century of the common era, ancient script versions of the lost chapters were
presented at court and were accepted as authentic. It was only in the early Qing
dynasty (eighteenth century) that these were denitively proven to be spurious.
Legge, James, tr. The Shoo King or the Book of Historical Documents. Volume of
The Chinese Classics. 2nd edition. Oxford: Clarendon, 1861. Rpt. Hong Kong:
Hong Kong University Press, 1960.
Karlgren, Bernhard. The Book of Documents. Bulletin of the Museum of Far
Eastern Antiquities : –. Rpt. Gteborg: Elanders, 1950.
Palmer, Martin, et al. The Most Venerable Book: Shangshu, also Known as the Shu
Jing: The Classic of Chronicles. London: Penguin, 2014.
Shaughnessy, Edward L., The Tsinghua University Warring States Bamboo
Manuscripts, Volume One: The Yi Zhou Shu and Pseudo-Yi Zhou Shu Chapters.
Beijing: Tsinghua University Press, 2023.
Cook, Constance A., and Paul R. Goldin, eds. A Source Book of Ancient Chinese
Bronze Inscriptions. Revised edition. Early China Special Monograph Series .
Berkeley, 2020.

The Classic of Poetry (Shi jing), also known as Mao Poetry (Mao Shi), is the
oldest collection of poetry in China, with poems that were composed
after the beginning of the Zhou dynasty (c. 1000) down to about . The
poems are divided into three major types: Hymns, including the earliest
pieces in the collection, these were sung in the ancestral temple; Odes,
divided between Major and Minor, these generally praised the exploits of the
founders of the Zhou dynasty and important gures in its later history; and
Airs of the various states, folk songs of thirteen dierent states that became
independent after the collapse of the Western Zhou dynasty. Poetry served
throughout the entirety of the Zhou dynasty as the preeminent form of
literary expression. The most important subsequent collection was the Verses
of Chu (Chu Ci), said to have been authored by Qu Yuan and other gures
from the late Warring States state of Chu.
Legge, James. The Shih King, or, Book of Poetry. Sacred Books of the East, Volume .
19871. Rpt. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960.
Waley, Arthur. The Book of Songs. London: Allen & Unwin, 1937. Rpt. with a Preface
by Joseph Allen. New York: Grove Press, 1996.
Karlgren, Bernhard. The Book of Odes. Stockholm: Museum of Far Eastern
Antiquities, 1950.


Literature

Staack, Thies. Reconstructing the Kongzi shilun: From the Arrangement of the
Bamboo Slips to a Tentative Translation. Asiatische Studien/ tudes asiatiques
. (2010): –.
Mattos, Gilbert L. The Stone Drums of Chin. Monumenta Serica Monograph Series
. Nettetal, Germany: Steyler, 1988.
Hawkes, David. Chu tzu: The Songs of the South, an Ancient Chinese Anthology.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1959. Second revised edition: Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books Limited, 1985.
Sukhu, Gopal. The Songs of Chu: An Anthology of Ancient Chinese Poetry by Qu
Yuan and Others. New York: Columbia University Press, 2017.

The Springs and Autumns (Chunqiu) is a spare annalistic history of the state
of Lu covering the period from through . It is traditionally said to have
been written by Confucius, but few modern scholars give much credence to
that tradition. It has been recognized as a classic in the rst place because of
its nature as a work of history, and it is now clear that most if not all states in
ancient China had their own annalistic histories, and a few have now been
unearthed. It has also long been contended that the book includes subtle
wording that reveals Confuciuss evaluation of historical actors and events.
This has led to a robust commentarial literature. Three such early
commentaries, the Zuo Tradition (Zuo zhuan), the Gongyang Tradition
(Gongyang zhuan), and Guliang Tradition (Guliang zhuan), have been
recognized as classics in their own right. The Zuo Tradition in particular is the
most important source for the history of the Springs and Autumns period.
Legge, James. The Chun Tsew, with the Tso Chuen. The Chinese Classics V. London:
Trbner, 1872. Rpt. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960.
Durrant, Stephen; Li, Wai-yee; Schaberg, David. Zuo Tradition (Zuozhuan). Seattle:
University of Washington Press, 2016.
Van Auken, Newell Ann. Spring and Autumn Historiography: Form and Hierarchy in
Ancient Chinese Annals. New York: Columbia University Press, 2022.
Legge, James, tr. Zhushu jinian James Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. III, The Shoo
King or Book of Historical Documents. Oxford: Clarendon, 1861. Rpt. Hong
Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960, Prolegomena, Ch. IV, The Annals of
the Bamboo Books, pp. –.
Miller, Harry, tr. The Gongyang Commentary on The Spring and Autumn Annals: A
Full Translation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
Gen Liang, tr. A Forgotten Book: Chun Qiu Guliang Zhuan. Singapore: World
Scientic, 2011.
Zhao, Ye. Spring and Autumn Annals of Wu and Yue: An Annotated Translation of
Wu Yue Chunqiu. Translated by Jianjun He. Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
2021.
Milburn, Olivia. The Glory of Yue: An Annotated Translation of the Yuejue shu.
Leiden: Brill, 2010.

Essays

Milburn, Olivia. The Spring and Autumn Annals of Master Yan. Leiden/Boston: Brill,
2016.
Pines, Yuri. Zhou History Unearthed: The Bamboo Manuscript Xinian and Early
Chinese Historiography. New York: Columbia University Press, 2020.

The three ritual classics, Ceremonies and Rituals (Yi li), Record of Ritual (Li
ji), and Zhou Rituals (Zhou li), together constitute the fth of the traditional
Five Classics. The Ceremonies and Rituals, probably dating to the Warring
States period, describes the rituals appropriate to the shi sire class of the
population. The Record of Ritual is a heterogeneous text including chapters
of several dierent genres; although the book was not edited in its nal form
until the Han dynasty, it is clear that much of it dates from the Warring States
period, and manuscript versions of some of the chapters have even been
unearthed in recent decades. The Zhou Rituals, originally known as the Zhou
Oces (Zhou Guan), is the one classic that has not yet been translated into
English. It purports to describe the structure of government implemented
by the Duke of Zhou at the beginning of the Zhou dynasty; in fact, the book
is generally recognized as a late ideal that was never actually put into practice.
Steele, John C. The I-li: or Book of Etiquette and Ceremonial. Translated from the
Chinese With Introduction, Notes and Plans. London: Probsthain & Co., 1917.
Legge, James. The L K (Book of Rites). Sacred Books of the East, volumes and .
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1885.

During the last period of his life, Confucius was surrounded by a large group
of disciples to whom he imparted his vision of the way life should be lived.
By shortly after his death in , these disciples began to transmit his
teachings in written form. The Analects (Lunyu) purports to be a record of
his sayings to those disciples, and in large part that is just what it is. It is often
regarded as the earliest work of philosophy in the Chinese tradition. Later
generations of followers of the Confucian way developed this philosophy in
divergent ways. Mencius and Xunzi, in particular, have had great inuence
on later Chinese philosophy.
Legge, James. Confucian Analects, the Great Learning, and the Doctrine of the Mean.
The Chinese Classics Vol. I. London: Trbner, 1861. Rpt. Hong Kong: Hong Kong
University Press, 1960.
Waley, Arthur. The Analects of Confucius. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1938.
Rpt. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2000.
Lau, D. C. Confucius, The Analects (Lun y). Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1979.
Ames, Roger T. and Henry Rosemont Jr. The Analects of Confucius: A Philosophical
Translation. A New Translation Based on the Dingzhou Fragments and Other
Recent Archaeological Finds. New York: Ballantine, 1998.


Literature

Brooks, E. Bruce, and A. Taeko Brooks. The Original Analects: Sayings of Confucius
and His Successors, 0479–0249. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
Legge, James. The Hsio King. Sacred Books of the East, Vol. III. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1879.
Ames, Roger T. and Henry Rosemont. The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence: A
Philosophical Translation of the Xiaojing. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2009.
Legge, James. The Works of Mencius. The Chinese Classics, Vol. . Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1861.
Lau, D. C. Mencius. London: Penguin Books, 1970. Rpt. Mencius (New Bilingual
Edition). Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 2003.
Van Norden, Bryan. Mencius: With Selections from Traditional Commentaries.
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 2008.
Bloom, Irene. Ed. Philip J. Ivanhoe. Mencius. New York: Columbia University Press,
2009.
Dubs, Homer H. The Works of Hsntze. London, Probsthain & Co., 1927.
Watson, Burton. Hsn-tzu: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University Press,
1964.
Knoblock, John. Xunzi: A Translation and Study of the Complete Works. vols.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988–1994.
Hutton, Eric L. Xunzi: The Complete Text. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2014.
Cook, Scott. The Bamboo Texts of Guodian: A Study and Complete Translation.
vols. Cornell East Asia Series –. Ithaca, N.Y., 2012.

Daoism is a way of thought that takes the Way (dao) of nature as the model
for life. Within this general notion, there are various permutations. The rst
exposition of the philosophy is usually credited to Laozi, traditionally
thought to have been an elder contemporary of Confucius. He is supposed
to have written a book, referred to either as Laozi or Classic of the Way and
Virtue (Daode jing), the version of which available to us today has about
, characters in eighty-one chapters, though early manuscript copies that
were unearthed about thirty years ago contain only about a third of those
chapters. Later thinkers also grouped under the label Daoist include most
prominently Zhuangzi, who lived in the latter half of the fourth century; his
book is not only philosophically profound, but also one of the masterpieces
of Chinese literature.
Legge, James. The Sacred Books of China: The Texts of Taoism. Rpt. New York: Dover
Publications, 1962.
Chan, Wing-tsit. The Way of Lao Tzu (Tao-te ching). Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1963.
Lau, D.C. Tao-te-ching. London: Penguin Books, 1963.
Henricks, Robert G. Lao-Tzu Te-Tao Ching: A New Translation Based on the Recently
Discovered Ma-wang-tui Texts. New York: Ballantine, 1989.

Essays

Henricks, Robert G. Lao Tzus Tao Te Ching: A Translation of the Startling New
Documents Found at Guodian. Translations from the Asian Classics. New York:
Columbia University Press, 2000.
Watson, Burton, trans. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1968.
Graham, A.C. Chuang-tz: The Inner Chapters. London and Boston: George Allen &
Unwin, 1981. Rpt., Indianapolis and Cambridge, Mass.: Hackett, 2001.
Cleary, Thomas. Wen-tzu: Understanding the Mysteries. Boston: Shambhala, 1992.
Graham, A.C. The Book of Lieh Tzu. London: John Murray, 1961.
Brindley, Erica F., Paul R. Goldin and Esther S. Klein. A Philosophical Translation
of the Heng Xian. Dao (2013): –.

After the death of Confucius, an army of disciples coalesced around Mo Di
or Mozi, a thinker who advocated a situational ethics intended to create the
greatest good for the greatest number of people. This included advocating
for universal love, which rather than a notion of free love stressed the need
for impartiality in all human relationships. This entailed rejecting even the
priority of family relationships, which was the core of Confuciuss teaching.
By the late fourth century, Mozis teaching was said to have been extremely
popular. However, in later centuries it was largely forgotten.
Watson, Burton tr. Mo-tzu: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University Press,
1963.
Johnston, Ian. Mozi: A Complete Translation. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press,
2010.
Knoblock, John, and Jerey Riegel. Mozi: A Study and Translation of the Ethical and
Political Writings. China Research Monograph . Berkeley: Institute of East
Asian Studies, University of California, 2013.

The political theory known in the West as Legalism (Fajia) developed in
stages beginning in the middle of the Warring States period. It is especially
associated with the state of Qin, which enthusiastically adopted its principles
of bureaucratic government, but elements of the thought were to be found in
most of the political theories of the time, and it continued to play an
inuential role in Chinese governing for many centuries to come.
Duyvendak, J. J. L. The Book of Lord Shang: A Classic of the Chinese School of Law.
London: Arthur Probsthain, 1928. Rpt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1963.
Pines, Yuri. The Book of Lord Shang: Apologetics of State Power in Early China . New
York: Columbia University Press, 2017.
Creel, Herrlee G. Shen Pu-hai: A Chinese Political Philosopher of the Fourth Century
B.C. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974.
Emerson, John. Shen Dao: Text, Translation, and Study. N.p.: ditions Le Real, 2012.


Literature

Watson, Burton tr. Han Fei Tzu: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1964.
Liao, W. K., trans. The Complete Works of Han Fei Tzu. vols. London: Arthur
Probsthain, 1939.
Kern, Martin. The Stele Inscriptions of Chin Shih-huang: Text and Ritual in Early
Chinese Imperial Representation. American Oriental Series . New Haven, 2000.
Hulsew, A.F.P. Remnants of Chin Law: An Annotated Translation of the Chin Legal
and Administrative Rules of the 3rd century B.C. Discovered in Yn-meng
Prefecture, Hu-pei Province, in 1975. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1985.
Caldwell, Ernest. Writing Chinese Laws: The Form and Function of Legal Statutes
Found in the Qin Shuihudi Corpus. New York: Routledge, 2018.

The School of Names (Ming jia) or Logicians was a minor group of thinkers
who proposed logical conundrums apparently intended to show the folly of
formulating rational argumentation. One of the most famous logicians was
Hui Shi, a friend and intellectual adversary of Zhuangzi, but he left only a
short series of paradoxes. The book Gongsun Longzi is often regarded as the
prime remaining example of this thought.
Perleberg, Max. The Works of Kung-sun Lung tzu. Hong Kong: The Local Printing
Press, 1952.
Johnston, Ian. The Gongsun Longzi: A Translation and an Analysis of Its
Relationship to Later Mohist Writings. Journal of Chinese Philosophy .
(2004): –.
Harbsmeier, Christoph. A Reading of the Guodian Manuscript Yucong
as a Masterpiece of Early Chinese Analytic Philosophy and Conceptual
Analysis. Studies in Logic . (2011): –.

There were many other thinkers whose thought is not easily assigned to one
school or another. Most later Chinese bibliographies and analyses assign
them to the category Miscellaneous (Za) perhaps also to be regarded as
Syncretist.
Rickett, Allyn W. The Kuan-tzu, A Repository of Early Chinese Thought. Hong Kong:
Hong Kong University Press, 1965.
Rickett, Allyn W. Guanzi: Political, Economic, and Philosophical Essays from Early
China. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985.
James I. Crump. Chan-kuo tse. Ann Arbor, Mi.: Center for Chinese Studies,
University of Michigan, 1996.
Knoblock, John, and Jerey Riegel. The Annals of L Buwei: A Complete Translation
and Study. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2000.
Fischer, Paul. Shizi: Chinas First Syncretist. New York: Columbia University Press, 2012.
Defoort, Carine. The Pheasant Cap Master: A Rhetorical Reading. Albany, N.Y.:
SUNY Press, 1997.

Essays

One of the most important categories of literature in ancient China concerns
the arts of war. The most important of these works is Sunzis Art of War
(Sunzi Bingfa), which is sometimes regarded as the oldest military treatise in
the world. It has been translated many times, and has been seen to have
implications far beyond the ancient battleeld.
Giles, Lionel. The Art of War: The Oldest Military Treatise in the World. 1944.
Reprinted as Sun Tzu on the Art of War. London: Kegan Paul, 2001.
Grith, Samuel B. Sun Tzu: The Art of War. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Mair, Victor. The Art of War: Sun Zis Military Methods. New York: Columbia
University Press, 2007.
Sawyer, Ralph. Sun Tzu: Art of War. Boulder: Westview, 1994.
Ames, Roger T. Sun-tzu: The Art of Warfare. The First English Translation
Incorporating the Recently Discovered Yin-cheh-shan Texts. New York:
Ballantine, 1993.
Sawyer, Ralph, trans. Sun Pin: Military Methods. Boulder: Westview, 1995.
Caldwell, Ernest. Promoting Action in Warring States Political Philosophy: A First
Look at the Chu Manuscript Cao Mies Battle Arrays. Early China (2014):
–.

Other texts from ancient China include descriptions of the natural world,
especially of geography. The most important example of this genre is The
Classic of Mountains and Seas (Shan Hai Jing). Other writings might best be
described as environmental treatises, advising the proper use of natural
resources, and spelling out the repercussions of their misuse.
Birrell, Anne. The Classic of Mountains and Seas. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1999.
Strassberg, Richard. A Chinese Bestiary: Strange Creatures from the Guideways
Through Mountains and Seas. Berkeley : University of California Press, 2002.
Cheng Te-kun. The Travels of Emperor Mu. Journal of the North China Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society (1933): –; (1934): –.
Barnard, Noel. The Chu Silk Manuscript: Translation and Commentary.
(Monographs on Far Eastern History ). Canberra: Australian National
University, 1973.
Li Ling. The Chu Silk Manuscripts from Zidanku, Changsha (Hunan Province).
Lothar von Falkenhausen and Donald Harper tr. vols. Hong Kong: Chinese
University of Hong Kong Press, 2020, 2023.
Pines, Yuri. Political Mythology and Dynastic Legitimacy in the Rong Cheng shi
Manuscript. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies . (2010):
–.


HEREDITARY HOUSES