CHAPTER 39
BIOGRAPHY OF MOUFU, DUKE OF ZHAI

Zhai, often mispronounced as Ji and later referred to as She (though also
mispronounced as Ye), was a small state located in present-day Xingyang
county, Henan province, between Kaifeng and Zhengzhou, where the Yellow
River empties into the Central Plain ﬂood basin. According to the Zuo
Tradition, it was one of six states established by sons of the Duke of Zhou
(d. c. 1033), and rulers of the state continued to be inﬂuential in the local
politics of the state of Zheng well into the Springs and Autumns period.
Lords of this state were especially inﬂuential at two diﬀerent periods in Zhou
history: ﬁrst, during the middle of the Western Zhou period, when they
served as close advisers to the Zhou kings Zhao (r. 977/975–957) and Mu (r.
956–918), and then again in the early Springs and Autumns period, by which
time the state had been absorbed into the larger neighboring state of Zheng.
Of all the ﬁgures associated with the state, none was more important than
Moufu (d. 936), who was its head throughout the ﬁrst half of King Mu’s
reign. This was a particularly perilous moment in Western Zhou history,
following upon a disastrous military defeat in 957, when King Mu’s father,
King Zhao, was defeated in the course of an attack on the southern state of
Chu, losing his own life and much of the Zhou army. Later texts suggest that
King Mu was as prone to dangerous undertakings as his ill-starred father
had been, but that Moufu, the Duke of Zhai, strived to restrain the king’s
worst impulses.
Several bronze inscriptions from throughout the latter part of the early
Western Zhou mention a Duke of Zhai, one of them, known as the Nüe ding,
suggesting that he was the supreme commander of the Zhou army. Another
inscription, on the Ling ding, describes an unnamed Zhou king traveling by
chariot to a palace at Zhai, with someone named Zhai Junior (Zhai Zhong)
riding in the chariot together with him. While the identities of both this
Zhou king and Zhai Junior are uncertain, it seems likely that they were King
Zhao and a son of the then reigning duke of Zhai; in any event, the

Biographies

relationship certainly bespeaks a close relationship between these two
ﬁgures. Of course, bronze vessels were not cast to commemorate King Zhao’s
defeat and death, but the event is mentioned, albeit obliquely, in the
traditional historical record, with several passages mentioning that a Duke
of Zhai accompanied the king, some of them adding that this duke also lost
his life at the time, drowning in the Han River.
Other, only slightly later, bronze inscriptions show that King Mu quickly
set about reorganizing the Zhou military soon after succeeding his father.
Some of this must have been forced upon him. Not only had the Zhou army
been decimated in King Zhao’s southern campaign, but early in King Mu’s
reign it also faced attacks from the Eastern Peoples, attacks that reached into
the very heartland of the Zhou eastern capital. However, some other military
activity was apparently driven by the king’s own initiative. Several Warring
States texts that were unearthed in the third century CE from a tomb in
present-day Jixian, Henan, very near to where the state of Zhai was located,
contain information—probably partly historical, partly legendary—about
this period of King Mu’s reign. One of these texts, known as the Biography of
Son of Heaven Mu, describes a long-distance journey undertaken by the king
and his army, setting out from the eastern capital at modern Luoyang, Henan,
proceeding north along the Taihang Mountains between Henan, Hebei and
Shanxi, and then following the Yellow River into Central Asia. While most of
this “biography” simply recounts the travels of the king, one passage relates
that he met and enjoyed a relationship with the Queen Mother of the West
(Xi Wang Mu); it is this passage for which the Biography of Son of Heaven
Mu is most famous.
The Biography of Son of Heaven Mu mentions several times that another
Duke of Zhai traveled with the king; this Duke of Zhai was named Moufu.
This Moufu is also mentioned prominently in another text that was
discovered in the tomb at Jixian: the Bamboo Annals. The ﬁrst mention
comes in the eleventh year of the king’s reign (946), saying that he was
named to be qingshi, probably equivalent to prime minister. According to the
same text, two years later he accompanied the king on his journey to the
west described in Biography of Son of Heaven Mu, even though other texts
record that he advised against it. Finally, the Bamboo Annals mentions that
Moufu died in the twenty-ﬁrst year of King Mu’s reign, now given the
posthumous title of the Cultured Duke of Zhai.
King Mu’s journey to the west, and especially his meeting with, and
apparent romance with, the Queen Mother of the West, are certainly the
best-known contents of the Biography of Son of Heaven Mu. However, there


Moufu, Duke of Zhai

is one chapter that was tacked on to the end of the text that was apparently
originally a separate text, which one early editor called The Death of Cheng
Ji, the Lover of King Mu of Zhou. This text purports to describe a diﬀerent
royal romance that apparently took place at this time. The text recounts how
on a royal hunting trip in the eastern domain, very near the Duke of Zhai’s
home, the king met and fell in love with a woman named Cheng Ji. Her name
indicates that she was from a very small state in the area called Cheng, and
also that she was from the same extended family as the king. This is important
because according to ancient Chinese tradition, relationships between males
and females of the same family were regarded as incestuous, no matter how
distant the relationship may have been. Despite this taboo, the king had a
pleasure palace constructed for her, called Doubled Jade-Disk Terrace.
Unfortunately, shortly thereafter Cheng Ji became ill and died. The king
commanded that she be buried with the honors of a queen and then went
into mourning, the text describing him as so despondent that he would not
even meet with the various heads of state who had come to pay their
condolences. The Death of Cheng Ji, the Lover of King Mu of Zhou concludes
with a common soldier criticizing the king: “From of old there has been life
and death; how could it be diﬀerent only with a sweetheart.”9
Even though The Death of Cheng Ji, the Lover of King Mu of Zhou, like the
Biography of Son of Heaven Mu and Bamboo Annals, was found in a tomb
dating to just slightly after 300 BCE, and thus is certainly ancient, most
readers regard it as ﬁction, some literary historians even treating it and the
Biography of Son of Heaven Mu as the beginnings of the Chinese ﬁction
tradition. Another text, almost certainly found in the same tomb and almost
certainly also relating to Cheng Ji’s death, is certainly ﬁctional; it is almost
certainly the earliest known example of a genre that would come to be known
“stories of the strange.” There is much about it that is very strange indeed.
King Mu of Zhou’s Queen Jiang went to bed during the day and
became pregnant. [Yue:] Cheng Ji was favored, and stole and raised
[the baby]. Killing fourteen blackbirds, she smeared it with pig blood,
and put it with Queen Jiang, who thereupon reported to the king
about it. The king was alarmed, and opening the books prognosticated
it saying:
The wings of the mayﬂy, Fly and gather on the window.
As for the wild goose’s stopping, The younger brother cannot bring
order to it.

Biographies

The august numen has descended to perform an execution; Would
that it return to its place.
He asked the Scribe of the Left about it, and Scribe Bao said: “Insects
ﬂying and gathering on the window means that the sun has lost its
place; it is that that petty person was not capable of raising the lord’s
son.” Scribe Liang said: “This means that the palace relative will retain
his body; only after returning it to the mother will you get peace.
Inscribe and store it [i.e., the record of the divination], and its beneﬁt
will be incited.” The king together with the Commandant of the
Secretariat inscribed and stored it in the coﬀers. After three months,
Cheng Ji died. On the seventh day she returned, and spoke about the
situation saying: “The past queen angered me greatly, saying: ‘You are a
barbarian slave; why have you stolen the lord’s son and not returned
him to his mother? I will discard your great punishment when the
king’s son is in power.’ ”10
This story of the king’s romance with Cheng Ji is relevant to the biography
of Moufu, the Duke of Zhai, because there is yet another ancient text that
purports to record his ﬁnal advice to King Mu, given while he was on his
deathbed. One version of this text has long been known as a chapter in the
Leftover Zhou Scriptures, which is supposed to be a collection of ancient
writings left over after Confucius had ﬁnished editing the Exalted Scriptures.
An ancient manuscript of this text, bearing the title The Duke of Zhai’s
Testamentary Charge, was recently discovered, dating to about the same time
as the Biography of Son of Heaven Mu and Bamboo Annals. One passage of
the text contains Moufu’s most pointed advice to the king.
You ought not because of favored consorts hurt your good queen. You
ought not because of small plans defeat great considerations. You
ought not because of favored sires hurt the great oﬃcers, ministers
and deputies. You ought not bring family to advise your house, to
suppress and not care for those outside it.11
This passage would be good advice to any king, or indeed any head of a
family. However, it seems to take on special meaning when considered in
light of King Mu’s romance with Cheng Ji. If so, perhaps there is more than
a kernel of truth in all of these ﬁctional accounts, and Moufu, the Duke of
Zhai, really did live, more or less as the texts say.
