
CHAPTER 48
BIOGRAPHY OF CONFUCIUS

Kong Qiu or simply Kongzi, Master Kong, usually referred to in the West
as Confucius (551–479), is unquestionably the most famous person in
all of Chinese history. Renowned as the Teacher for Ten Thousand
Generations, he is credited with editing the three main ancient classics,
the Classic of Changes, Exalted Scriptures, and the Classic of Poetry, as well
as composing the Springs and Autumns, the early history of his native
state of Lu, in present-day Shandong province. While these literary
accomplishments are doubtless ﬁctional, there is no question that he
attracted a great number of disciples during his life and imparted to them a
particular way of seeing the world that put mankind at its center, and argued
that the cultivation of the individual person was the ﬁrst step to world peace.
This philosophy is perhaps best summed up in one of the quotations of
Confucius included in the Analects, a text composed primarily of the
Master’s sayings:
Yan Yuan asked about humaneness (ren). The Master said: “To
overcome oneself and restore the rites is to be humane. If for a single
day one could overcome oneself and restore the rites, all under heaven
would return to humaneness through this. To be humane comes from
the self; how could it come from others.”37
There was nothing about Confucius’s birth that would have predicted his
greatness. His biography in Records of the Historian begins:
Kongzi was born in Zou City in the Changping district of the state of
Lu. His ancestor was a man of the state of Song named Kong Fangshu.
Fangshu gave birth to Boxia. Boxia gave birth to Shuliang He, and He,
together with a woman of the Yan clan, joined together in the wilds
and gave birth to Kong Qiu.

Biographies

Confucius’s father, Shuliang He, is mentioned several times in the Zuo
Tradition, twice commenting on his heroism in battle, but providing little
other information about him other than saying that he was from Zou, the
city where Confucius was born. Confucius’s mother is said in other sources
to have been named Yan Zhengzai, indicating that she was from the Yan
family, which much later sources say also lived in Zou. The expression
“joined together in the wilds” is a euphemism for an illicit sexual union. In
the Analects, there is almost no mention of Confucius’s family at all, though
it should be noted that quite a number of his disciples were from his mother’s
Yan family. The Records of the Historian biography of Confucius says that his
father Shuliang He was quite aged by the time that Confucius was conceived,
and that he died shortly after Confucius was born. Indeed, when sometime
later Confucius’s mother too died, Confucius, wished to bury her with his
father but did not know where he had been buried.
Despite Confucius’s apparent illegitimate birth, given his father’s heritage
he was raised as a member of the shi or sire class. This provided him an
entrée into the class of functionaries of the state of Lu, just below the ruling
class. At this time most states in China were undergoing a social revolution
in which the blood-based ruling elite was slowly being replaced—at least in
terms of government positions—by people from the shi class chosen for
their abilities. There is mention in the Mencius that during his youth,
Confucius was a minor oﬃcial in charge of sheep and cattle, perhaps as a
sort of accountant. The earliest mention of him in the Zuo Tradition serving
in any sort of oﬃcial capacity comes in the year corresponding to 525, when
he was twenty-six years old; it does not indicate what position Confucius
held, so that it must have been quite insigniﬁcant. Sometime within the next
few years, the Lu nobleman Meng Xizi (d. 518) is said to have sent his two
sons to study ritual with Confucius. It is somewhat ironic that according to
the Analects, Confucius, the man who barely knew his parents, emphasized
to these two boys the importance of ﬁlial piety, the reverence for one’s
parents.
Sometime later, Confucius left Lu for the neighboring large state
of Qi, where he is recorded as having had an interview with the ruler of the
state, Duke Jing (r. 547–490). In the interview, Duke Jing asked his
advice about government, prompting one of Confucius’s most famous
comments:
Confucius responded saying: “Let the lord be lord, the minister be
minister, the father be father, and the son be son.” 

Confucius

This is usually understood to mean that people should satisfy to the best of
their ability their social roles. However, those roles are not necessarily static;
just as sons will someday grow up to be fathers, in some contexts ministers
too will come into power. It was also in Qi that Confucius was introduced to
some of the splendors of classical Chinese music. It is said that after having
heard the shao music there, for three months he did not “know the taste of
meat,” and said “I never imagined that music could reach to this level.”40
Nevertheless, it would seem that he was not given a position there, and so
departed hastily.
Back in Lu, sometime prior to 500 Confucius was ﬁnally given an oﬃcial
position of some importance: he was appointed Minister of Crime, essentially
the police commissioner of the state. While serving in this capacity,
Confucius is mentioned as taking part in two events, one quite minor, and
one much more important. The minor event is that he participated in a
ceremony marking a state visit by Duke Jing of Qi, his erstwhile sponsor in
Qi. The more important event took place in 498, when he challenged the
three houses of Huan, the preeminent authorities in the state of Lu.
Unsuccessful in this challenge, Confucius left the state in the following year;
he would be gone for thirteen years, traveling from state to state in north
China seeking a ruler who would make use of his services. It is clear that he
was accompanied in these travels by many of his disciples.
Confucius went ﬁrst to Wèi, where he seems to have spent some eight
years. There are a number of anecdotes about his time in Wèi including
audiences with the head of state, Duke Ling (r. 534–493). While there he
also visited Nanzi (d. 480), Duke Ling’s beautiful but notorious wife (it was
widely rumored that while the duchess of Wèi, she engaged in various
sexual aﬀairs in her home state of Song). This angered Confucius’s oldest
disciple, Zi Lu (542–480), who upbraided Confucius for the visit. Confucius
defended himself saying: “If I have done anything wrong, let heaven punish
me, let heaven punish me.”41 The last event during this sojourn came when
Duke Ling asked him about military formations. Confucius responded
“I have heard something about the aﬀairs of ritual vessels, but I have never
studied the aﬀairs of armies”;42 it is said that he left the state the very
next day.
From Wèi, Confucius traveled south, via Song and Kuang, to the states of
Chen and Cai. In the course of this journey, Confucius and his band of
disciples found themselves under attack, the place of the attack variously
stated as Song, Kuang, and Chen. Some accounts suggest that they were
attacked because of a case of mistaken identity; it is also possible that they

Biographies

were caught up in hostilities between Chen and the far southern state of Wu.
In any event, it seems that they were on the verge of starvation. Many
anecdotes show Confucius to have been stoic in the face of this crisis, even
while the disciples were desperate to be saved. In one such anecdote, under
siege in the state of Kuang, he is said to have exclaimed:
The Cultured King (of Zhou) being dead, is it not the case that culture
resides here with me? If Heaven intends to let this culture die, those
who come after me will not be able to participate in this culture, but if
Heaven has not let this culture die, what do the men of Kuang have to
do with me.
Confucius did make it as far as Cai, located near present-day Xincai in
southeastern Henan province. There he met with Shen Zhuliang, the
governor of She, and apparently stayed there for perhaps another ﬁve years.
Like Duke Jing of Qi, this Governor of She also asked Confucius about
government. Confucius’s response proposed a modern translation of a line
found in both the Exalted Scriptures and also the Classic of Poetry: “Let those
near at hand be happy, and let those far away come.”
Despite Confucius’s esteem for the Governor of She, he eventually tired
of being away from his home state of Lu, and returned there no later than
484. Back home, he became something of a conﬁdant to the new ruler, Duke
Ai of Lu (r. 494–468) and also of Ji Kangzi (d. 468), the most powerful
nobleman in the state. On separate occasions, both of these ﬁgures asked
Confucius about the art government. Confucius’s answers to both men were
similar, though put in diﬀerent words.
Duke Ai asked: “How can I make the people obey?” Confucius
responded saying: “If you raise up the straight and put them over the
crooked, then the people will obey; if you raise up the crooked and put
them over the straight, then the people will not obey.”45
Ji Kangzi asked Confucius about government. Confucius responded
saying: “To govern is to be upright. If you lead by being upright, who
would dare not to be upright!”
Unfortunately, by then Confucius was already quite aged, especially for the
time. He passed away in the fourth month of 479. There is a passage in the
Mencius that the day after Confucius died, several of his surviving disciples



Confucius

wanted to elevate one other disciple, You Ruo, almost always referred to in
the Analects as Youzi—Master You—to be their master, apparently because
he looked like Confucius. One other disciple, Zengzi, refused to do so. In
fact, Youzi seems quickly to have been forgotten by the others, while Zengzi
would go on to have a decisive inﬂuence on the subsequent development of
Confucianism.
