CHAPTER
THE HEREDITARY HOUSE OF ZENG

Although the state of Zeng is never mentioned, at least by this name, in
traditional historical sources, it is one of the best attested states in the
archaeological record. Already in the Song dynasty, there is a record of two
dierent bells, both discovered in Anlu, a city in present-day Hubei
province, and both bearing the inscription It was the kings fty-sixth year;
returning from Xiyang, Yan Zhang, king of Chu, makes these ritual vessels
for Lord Yi of Zengs ancestral temple, to place in Xiyang. May he forever
hold them and use them to make oerings. Scholars of the Song dynasty
were already able to identify Yan Zhang, King of Chu as King Hui of Chu
(r. –); not only was he the only Chu king to have reigned as long as
fty-six years, but it is also recorded in Records of the Historian that his
personal name was Zhang, just as in the inscriptions. What the scholars of
the Song dynasty were unable to do was to identify Lord Yi of Zeng. There
was simply no record either of him or even of the state of Zeng, at least
anywhere near the area of present-day Hubei.
This changed dramatically in 1978, when a large tomb was excavated in
Suizhou, Hubei, very near Anlu. This was none other than the tomb of Lord
Yi of Zeng, who apparently died in . This has been hailed as one of the
greatest archaeological discoveries of the twentieth century; even now,
almost a half century later, this does not seem to be an exaggeration at all.
The tomb was divided into four chambers, essentially a subterranean palace.
Records written on bamboo slips—still the earliest such bamboo-slip records
yet discovered—record that forty-three chariots, donated by lords from
throughout the region, took part in the funeral procession that brought the
goods to the tomb. The northern chamber was an armory, lled with
weapons. The central chamber, essentially the central court, was supplied
with numerous bronze ritual vessels, many of them inscribed with the name
of Lord Yi of Zeng. The most astounding discovery was a rack of sixty-four
chime-bells, still suspended from the original wooden rack. Still more

Hereditary Houses

amazing, grouped together with these bells was one other bell, with the same
inscription known from the Song dynasty; it was obviously a burial gift from
King Hui of Chu to be buried with Lord Yi of Zeng, whose name appears in
this inscription as well. The western chamber contained string and wind
musical instruments—a chamber music ensemble apparently intended for
the lords private entertainment. Eerily, it also contained thirteen cons in
which there were the remains of thirteen female attendants, presumably the
musicians. The eastern chamber held the nested cons of the lord, as well as
another eight smaller cons with still more female attendants, perhaps his
consorts. However, the tomb of his primary wife was separate from his,
discovered three years later about one hundred meters away.
This discovery stimulated a debate among scholars about the identication
of Zeng and about its history. Surprisingly, this small state apparently
unknown in the traditional historical record is the best attested state of all
(other than the Zhou royal house itself) in bronze inscriptions from all
periods of the Zhou dynasty. It was mentioned in other inscribed bronze
vessels discovered already during the Northern Song dynasty (–1127). In
1118, also at Anlu, Hubei, a cache of six ancient bronze vessels was discovered.
These vessels were much older than the bells that King Hui of Chu had made
for Lord Yi of Zeng. These earlier vessels bear inscriptions recording that
they were cast by someone named Zhong to commemorate a military
campaign, under the leadership of Nangong, to suppress a rebellion by an
enemy referred to as the Tiger Land (Hufang).

It was the year that the king commanded Nangong to attack the
rebelling Tiger Country. The king commanded Zhong to proceed to
the southern countries to connect the road and to establish a royal
residence at Kui . . . Mountain. Zhong called out to send back a living
phoenix to the king, placing it in the treasured vessel.

Nangong has long been identied as Nangong Kuo, a minister who assisted
Kings Wen and Wu of Zhou at the very beginning of the Zhou dynasty, and
this was the basis for dating these Six Vessels of Anlu to the very beginning
of the Western Zhou dynasty. This Tiger Land was apparently located in the
area from which the vessels were unearthed. The longest inscription on these
vessels begins:

The king commanded Zhong to proceed to inspect the southern
countries to connect the road and to establish a residence at Zeng.


Zeng

To establish a residence at Zeng would seem to refer to the establishment
of a state there, the southernmost Zhou colony. Although its position far
away from the Zhou capital was always precarious, between the time of this
establishment and the death of Lord Yi of Zeng in , Zeng not only
survived but apparently ourished. Generation after generation, lords of the
state and other noblemen sponsored the making of hundreds of bronze
vessels, some with inscriptions recounting the history of the state. These
have long been recognized in various royal and private collections of bronze
vessels, even if no one knew where the state of Zeng was located. The
discovery of Lord Yis tomb in 1978 brought much more attention on the
part of archaeologists to the area around Suizhou, and in the decades since
that time cemetery after cemetery from throughout the course of the
centuries of the rst millennium BCE has been discovered. Unfortunately,
tomb robbers have beaten archaeologists to many of the tombs, with many
bronze vessels from lords and noblemen of the state of Zeng ooding the
international antiquities market.
Late in 2010, farmers working at a place called Yejiashan, about twenty
kilometers from where Lord Yis tomb was located, inadvertently opened
two ancient tombs. Early the next year archaeologists began excavating the
site, eventually opening sixty-ve tombs from the early Western Zhou,
including three large tombs that seem to be those of early lords of Zeng. One
of these lords, named Jian, may have ruled the state shortly after the time of
its establishment. In addition to a full range of bronze ritual vessels and a
very early set of bronze bells some ve hundred years older than those of
Lord Yi, many of the tombs were supplied with a great number of weapons.
Archaeologists suggest that this is evidence of the still precarious security
situation in which Zeng found itself at this time. Some of the inscriptions on
the bronze vessels show that it alternately cooperated with and competed
with a neighboring state called E, an early cemetery of which was also
unearthed in the vicinity. However, other evidence shows that shortly after
this time E moved out of the area, while Zeng expanded over the Tongbai
Mountains to the headwaters of the Huai River to become the major power
in this area between the rivers (i.e., the Han and Huai Rivers). Unfortunately,
suggestive though the inscriptions are, they do not provide sucient context
to understand the dynamics of these developments.
Some of this history can be discerned from another cemetery, also located
in Suizhou, that was excavated only in 2018. This cemetery is located at
Zaoshulin, in which four large tombs were excavated. These tombs together
contained even more bells than the tomb of Lord Yi: eighty-eight in all. What

Hereditary Houses

is more, even though one of them, numbered Tomb , had already been
plundered by tomb robbers, the archaeologists still recovered from it
numerous bronze food and wine vessels, as well as thirty-four bells of
dierent types; their inscriptions show that they were made for yet another
lord of Zeng, this one named Qiu. From the shape and ornamentation of
the vessels, the archaeologists have dated the tomb to the middle of the
Springs and Autumns period, roughly . Even though this is more than
three centuries later than the cemetery at Yejiashan, the bells carry a lengthy
inscription that recounts the founding of the state. It deserves to be translated
in full:

It was the kings fth month, the auspicious day dinghai (day ), Qiu,
Lord of Zeng said:
In the past when our illustrious High Ancestor was able to join
with the Zhou kings Wen and Wu, good and pure Bo Kuo was ever
careful of his virtue in serving the High God, and compliantly
embraced many blessings to be at the left and right of the rulers of
Zhou. He abundantly extended his sageliness and received those
who were not peaceful. Illustrious was his soul, spreading and
stirring respect.
The king hosted us in the Kang Palace, calling out to the Manager
to command our August Ancestor to be established in the southern
land, covering Cais southern gate, allied with Yings capital altar,
and screening the area to the east of the Han River. The southern
region is unbounded. Go on to campaign against the Huai Peoples
as far as Fanyang. (The king) said: King Zhao traveling south,
delivered a command at Zeng: Thoroughly complete our service,
being at the left and right of the ruler of Zhou.
(The king) awarded him use of a yue-axe, to use to campaign
throughout the southern region. Nan Gongs valor and astute sageliness
is renowned, causing the high and low to ascend and descend, and
protecting and ruling his sons and grandsons.

This inscription seems to resolve one of the conundrums regarding the
establishment of the state of Zeng. Its founder is supposed to have been
Nangong Kuo, who as noted above is supposed to have been an assistant to
the Zhou founders Kings Wen and Wu, but who is also supposed to have
been commanded by King Zhao of Zhou, three generations later than even
the time of King Wu, to lead a campaign to the south against the Tiger


Zeng

Country. From the inscription on this set of bells made for Lord Qiu of
Zeng, it is now clear that Nangong (which means Southern Palace) was Kuos
clan name, and as such continued to be used by his family. The inscription
conrms that Kuo served the Zhou founders and that he was looked back
upon as the high ancestor of Zeng, but it was not he who led the campaign
that actually established the state in the south. This was done by one of his
descendants, also known by the family name Nangong, or sometimes by the
homophonous name Nan Gong, Duke of the South.
While Zeng expanded to the north after its initial establishment, any
expansion to the south was blocked by the much larger state of Chu, which
was centered along the north bank of the Yangzi River. Chu too was an old
state, but much larger than Zeng, and one with much greater territorial
ambitions. It is clear from the material culture on display in the tomb of Lord
Qiu that Zeng was already heavily inuenced by Chu culture. Another tomb
in this same cemetery, also dated to about , contained yet another set of
chime bells, the inscription of which shows that they were cast for a woman
named Mi Jia (sometimes written Jia Mi). Her surname Mi indicates that she
was originally from Chu, and indeed other inscriptions on dowry vessels
reveal that she was a daughter of a king of Chu and was married to a lord of
Zeng. More than that, the set of chime bells that she sponsored shows that
after her husband died at a young age, she took over control of the state of
Zeng. The inscription, which begins with a quotation of Mi Jias husband,
probably named Duke Gong, identied as a descendant of Nangong Kuo,
the high ancestor of the state, and as a son of a Lord Mu of Zeng, pointing to
his illustrious pedigree, suggests that Chu had somehow double-crossed
Zeng, such that he was now opposing them despite his being married to a
daughter of the king of Chu (though some readers have drawn quite the
opposite sense from it). The inscription then goes on to quote Mi Jia herself,
showing her to be rmly in control of the Zeng government. Some passages
of the inscription are quite dicult to understand, but however it should
be understood, it oers a fascinating glimpse into the role of women in
intrastate relations.

It was the kings rst month, rst auspiciousness, yihai (day ), it was
said: Bo Kuo received the command to follow Yus traces to rule this
southern tributary. I am King Wens descendant, Mus eldest son, going
on to establish the country in Zeng. I do not dare to do anything
shameful. Chu having been duplicitous, we have come to oppose them.
Making good our plans, the great mandate does not change.

Hereditary Houses

Our resplendent youngest daughter Jia Mi said: Wuhu! Lord Gong
having died early, I protect his borderlands, and conduct control of the
Zeng state in order to prolong our Xia. I record his virtuous model and
the peoples basic rule. Oh-oh jiang-jiang, we being wife and husband,
I have diminished the lustre of the lower ruler, and respectfully fearing
the departed lords and our great ocers, have magnicently enjoyed
governance, causing our country and family to arise.
I select our auspicious black gold and golden ore, herewith myself
making these harmonious bells for the ancestral temple, in order to
please our beautiful emissaries and ne guests, uncles and elder
brothers and our great ocers, with which to be lial and to make
oering, receiving blessings without limit. Syncopated is their
harmony, glowing and gleaming. The great ocers, the many sires, and
the festival attendants will toast and oer, sing and dance, feast and
enjoy the drink and food, awarding us a numinous end and yellowing
old-age, with which to receive treasured blessings. May they not
change for ten thousand years, down to grandsons and sons all
protecting and using them.

Regardless of the relations between Zeng and Chu at the time of Duke
Qiu and Mi Jia, within another century the fates of the two states would once
again be intertwined, and this time Zeng would come to the rescue of Chu.
In just the few years between the discoveries of the Yejiashan and Zaoshulin
cemeteries, in 2013 yet another Zeng cemetery—dating to a century or more
later than the Zaoshulin cemetery—was discovered, this time at a site called
Wenfengta. This cemetery also contained the graves of various lords of Zeng,
including one that had four tomb ramps, what is called in Chinese a -
shaped tomb. Unfortunately, this tomb had been robbed clean except for the
eastern chamber, in which alone were found seventy ritual bronze vessels.
These show that the tomb belonged to a Lord Bing, probably the son of Lord
Yi, and so dated to around . Another tomb was of an earlier Zeng lord,
named Yu. He was probably Lord Yis grandfather, and must have died
shortly after . Interestingly enough, one of the bronze vessels in Lord Yis
tomb had an inscription showing that it was originally made for Lord Yu, but
his name had been scratched out of the bronze and replaced with Lord Yis
name. It is unclear why Lord Yi should have done this; after all, he certainly
had the wherewithal to cast a new vessel for himself.
In Lord Yus own tomb was discovered yet another set of chime bells with
an important inscription, claiming that Zeng was instrumental in coming to


Zeng

the rescue of Chu when it was attacked, in , and nearly overrun by the
eastern state of Wu. This inscription too warrants translation in full.

It was the kings fth month, the auspicious day jiawu (day ), Yu the
Lord of Zeng said:
Bo Kuo (served) God on High, and at the left and right of (kings)
Wen and Wu pierced Yins mandate and pacied all under heaven.
The king dispatched a command to Nan Gong to garrison the land
between the rivers, and to rule these Huai Peoples, watching over
those ruling the Jiang and Xia.
After the Zhou house had become debased, we therewith
harmoniously allied with Chu. Wu relying on its multitudes created
chaos, campaigning westward and attacking southward, then pressing
on Chu. The country of Chu having already grown weak, the mandate
of heaven was about to be lost. The majestic Lord of Zeng, complete
being his sagacity, personally took hold of the martial work, battling
for the Chu mandate and restoring the Chu king. The Lord of Zengs
soul, so beautiful is the Lord of Zeng, stalwart and fearsome, respectful
in his oerings and covenants, outwardly militant but embracing and
harmonizing the four borderlands. I have continued the Chu success,
changing and restoring Zengs boundaries.
Selecting our auspicious metal, I myself make this vessel for the
ancestral temple. The harmonious bells sound radiantly, herewith
being used lially to make oering to our august ancestors beseeching
long life and the great mandates prolongation. May pure virtue
descend and may I for ten thousand generations with this be exalted.

Unlike the histories of the other hereditary houses, almost all of which
are well known in traditional literature, the state of Zeng was all but
unknown, and its history can only be reconstructed—little by little—on the
basis of inscribed bronze vessels. While the claims made in bronze
inscriptions, if not quite exaggerated, almost invariably present only the
most favorable historical records. Nevertheless, the suggestion in this bell set
made for Lord Yu of Zeng that Zeng played a crucial role in rescuing Chu at
the time of this crisis is doubtless true in large measure, and would explain
in part why seventy years later King Huai of Chu, who rst came to power
just over a decade after this crisis, should have given the bronze bell to Lord
Yus grandson, Lord Yi of Zeng, that was found in 1119 and which rst
brought the name of Zeng to the light of day.