1914.-191*1  Part  I. 

CONTENTS. 


1.  To  Our  Readers. 

2.  The  Jewellery  of  Riqqeh. 

R.  Engelbach. 

3.  Egyptian  Nome  Ensigns. 

Prof.  P.  E.  Newberry. 

4.  Moon  Cult  in  Sinai. 

L.  Eckenstein. 

5.  Three  Steles  at  Graz. 

Prof.  F.  W.  Freiherr  v.  Bissing. 

6.  Egyptian    Beliefs    in    a   Future 

Life. 
Prof.  W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie, 

7.  The  Mysterious  Zet. 

8.  For  Reconsideration. 
g.  Periodicals. 

10.  Reviews. 

11.  Notes  and  News. 

12.  Egyptian      Research      Students 

Association. 

13.  The  Portraits. 


EDITOR  PROF.  FLINDERS  PETRIE,  F.R.S.,  F.B.A. 


Yearly,  yy.  Post  Free, 


Quarterly  Part,  2s. 

MACMILLAN   AND   CO., 
LONDON     AND     NEW     YORK; 


BRITISH    SCHOOL    OF    ARCHAEOLOGY    IN    EGYPT, 
University  College,  London. 


A 


W.fv 


^. 


Ancient  Egypt.     Edited  by  Prof,  Flinders  Petrie  ; 

assisted  by  Prof.  Ernest  Gardner  and  Dr.  Alan  Gardiner. 
Net  price  of  each  number  from  booksellers  is  2s. 
Subscriptions  for  the  four  quarterly  parts,  prepaid,  post  free,  js.,  are  received  by 

Hon.  Sec.  "Ancient  Egypt"  (H.  Flinders  Petrie),  University  College,  Gower 

Street,  London,  W.C. 
In  the  next  numbers,  papers  will  appear  by  M.  B^n^dite,  Dr.  Capart,  Dr.  Alan 

Gardiner,  Dr.  Spiegelberg,  and  others. 
Books  for  review,  papers  offered  for  insertion,  or  news,  should  be  addressed : — 
Editor  of  "  Ancient  Egypt," 

University  College,  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C. 


4 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/ancientegy1914to17brituoft 


'tM'* 


JEWELLERY   OF  THE   XIITH    AND     XVIIIth     DYNASTIES.     RIQQEH. 


ANCIENT   EGYPT. 


TO   OUR    READERS. 


A  Journal  on  Ancient  Egypt  has  long  been  needed  for  the  five 
thousand  readers  of  Egyptian  history,  and  several  times  in  the  last 
twenty  years  it  has  been  proposed  to  supply  this  want.  There  has  been 
hitherto  no  journal  in  England  or  abroad  to  keep  readers  acquainted 
with  the  advances  and  discoveries  about  the  principal  civilisation  of  the 
Ancient  World.  Egypt  appears  only  occasionally  in  some  periodicals 
on  antiquities  in  general.  The  foreign  publications  on  the  subject  are 
largely  devoted  to  the  single  branch  of  philology,  and  are  not  adapted 
to  reach  a  tenth  of  those  who  are  interested  in  the  ancient  life  of  Egypt. 
It  seems  only  fitting,  therefore,  that  the  largest  society  for  the  study  of 
that  country  should  perform  the  duty  of  presenting  to  the  public  a  view 
of  the  advance  of  knowledge. 

During  recent  years  there  has  grown  up  an  increased  interest  in 
the  past  of  man  and  the  course  of  his  changes  in  life  and  conditions. 
Most  educated  people  now  feel  that  the  causes  and  stages  of  the 
civilisation  that  the  world  now  has,  and  the  nature  of  man  which  has 
led  him  on,  is  at  the  very  foundation  of  our  view  of  life, — of  our  present 
actions, — of  our  future  expectations.  Man  cannot  be  understood  except 
through  his  own  history.  This  interest  in  the  nature  of  man  is  satisfied 
most  widely  in  Egypt.  The  history  of  that  land  has  more  continuity 
than  can  be  found  elsewhere,  and  the  age  of  its  known  past  can  scarcely 
be  rivalled  in  any  other  country.  Prehistoric  civilisation  is  most  com- 
pletely preserved  there ;  and  our  view  of  it  has  been  more  systematically 
reduced  to  order  than  in  any  other  instance. 

When  we  try  to  grasp  the  Prehistoric  ages  of  Europe,  it  is  solely  to 
Egypt  that  we  can  turn  for  any  definite  scale  of  history,  with  which  the 
various  periods  can  be  connected.  The  thousands  of  years  before 
classical  writings  can  only  be  gauged  by  the  Egyptian  dynasties. 

We  have,  then,  to  deal  with  the  vital  human  problem  of  the  nature 
of  man  and  his  development ;  how  he  has  come  to  be  where  he  is  now. 
Every  intelligent  person  who  looks  beyond  the  day's  affairs  must  feel 
that  the  sight  of  Egypt,  with  its  eight  successive  civilisations,  is  more  full 
of  meaning  and  of  interest  than  any  other  panorama  of  humanity. 

A 


3  To  Our  Readers. 

The  scope  of  this  Journal  of  Ancient  Egypt  is  intended  to  include 
original  articles,  by  English  and  foreign  writers,  on  discoveries  in  the 
history,  the  antiquities,  and  the  language ;  also  systematic  presentations 
of  the  state  of  knowledge  on  various  subjects  of  general  interest. 
A  special  feature  will  be  the  summaries  of  all  papers  in  the  foreign 
periodicals,  sufficient  to  show  in  detail  the  movement  of  research. 
Accounts  of  excavations  will  be  given,  and  notices  of  antiquities  that 
are  brought  to  light.  New  books  on  Egypt  will  be  reviewed  and 
analysed,  so  as  to  show  how  far  they  would  be  useful  to  our  readers. 
Objects  of  importance  in  various  museums  will  be  brought  forward ;  and 
a  series  of  whole-page  portraits  will  be  given,  two  in  each  number. 
Lastly,  notes  and  news  will  be  provided,  archaeological  and  personal, 
relating  to  Egyptian  research. 

A  feature  of  this  Journal  will  be  to  make  the  fullest  use  of  modern 
facilities  of  illustration.  Wesley  said  he  did  not  see  why  the  devil  should 
have  the  best  tunes,  and  we  do  not  see  why  the  world  and  the  flesh 
should  have  the  best  pictures.  As  many  good  illustrations  as  possible 
will  be  provided  in  the  text,  and  also  three  whole-page  plates  in  each 
part.  The  coloured  plate  of  jewellery  may  we  hope  be  a  precedent  for 
each  succeeding  volume.  A  head  from  one  of  the  plates  will  also  be 
placed  on  the  cover,  as  a  distinctive  mark  of  each  part. 

The  large  growth  of  public  interest  in  Egypt  is  seen  by  the  flourishing 
Student  Associations,  which  have  been  started  in  recent  years  in  many 
cities,  mostly  connected  with  the  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt. 
This  journal  will  be  the  regular  organ  of  the  various  branches  of  the 
Egyptian  Research  Students'  Association  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  it  will 
also  be  a  common  centre  for  similar  bodies  in  other  places. 

In  no  sense  is  Ancient  Egypt  a  substitute  for  the  regular  series 
of  annual  volumes  on  the  Excavations  of  the  British  School  in  Egypt. 
Those  volumes  are  essential  for  presenting  the  flow  of  work  and  discovery 
by  the  School.  Here  the  results  from  various  other  lines  of  excavation 
and  study  will  be  given  as  a  whole. 

The  appearance  of  this  journal  has  been  delayed  somewhat,  owing 
to  waiting  for  attempted  co-operation  with  other  English  enterprise  in 
Egypt.  The  needs  of  separate  bodies,  however,  proved  to  be  so  different 
that  the  issue  of  separate  publications  could  not  be  avoided.  At  the 
same  time  we  hope  to  keep  our  readers  informed  of  all  that  is  done  on 
the  subject,  from  various  sources,  English  and  foreign. 


(     3     ) 


^  THE  JEWELLERY  OF  RIQQEH. 

(^Frontispiece^ 

While  working  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  cemetery  of  Riqqeh,  about  four  miles  north 
of  Meydum,  I  found  the  tomb  in  which  was  the  jewellery  shown  in  the  frontispiece. 
Having  excavated  the  shaft,  which  was  a  large  one,  twenty-two  feet  deep,  we  came 
to  the  usual  bricked-up  entrance  to  the  chamber.  A  small  hole  had  been  made  in 
the  upper  courses  of  the  bricking  by  an  ancient  plunderer.  The  roof  had  collapsed 
inside  the  chamber,  and  on  removing  the  bricks  I  saw  that  about  twelve  tons  of  the 
marl  had  fallen  in.  The  workmen  cleared  this  away,  and  when  they  had  arrived 
within  a  couple  of  feet  of  the  floor  of  the  chamber,  I  stayed  in  the  tomb  till  it  was 
completely  cleared. 

The  original  size  of  the  chamber  was  lOO  inches  long  and  52  inches  wide. 
The  coffin,  which  had  been  crushed  flat,  had  been  laid  in  the  centre  of  the  chamber. 
Over  what  had  been  the  foot  of  the  coffin,  and  across  it,  could  be  traced  the 
remains  of  a  skeleton.  Over  this  again  were  the  arm-bones  of  another  body,  the 
remainder  of  which  lay  in  a  heap  about  two  feet  from  the  chest  of  the  first  body. 
It  seemed  as  if  it  had  been  suddenly  crushed  while  in  a  standing  or  crouching 
position. 

It  appears  as  if  the  plunderers  had  removed  only  a  few  bricks,  so  that  a  man 
could  crawl  inside.  One  of  them  entered,  opened  the  coflin,  and  lifted  the  body 
out,  laying  it  across  the  coffin,  so  that  he  could  easily  unwind  the  bandages.  A 
collar  of  beads  was  first  found,  and  passed  out  to  the  shaft,  where  it  was  left. 
Then  he  reached  the  jewel,  fig.  i  at  the  top  of  the  plate,  and  lifted  it.  Before 
he  could  take  away  any  more,  the  roof  fell  in  and  crushed  both  him  and  the 
mummy.  The  robbers,  seeing  the  fate  of  their  accomplice,  abandoned  the  tomb, 
and  filled  in  the  shaft  to  hide  their  doings.  By  a  singularly  lucky  chance  this 
tomb  had  escaped  the  attention  of  later  plunderers  ;  perhaps  because  they  saw  that 
it  had  already  been  attacked. 

The  objects  upon  the  body  were  as  follows  :  — 

Fig.  I.  Part  of  a  jewel  forming  the  name  o{  Kha-kheper-ra,  Senusert  II,  the 
beetle  being  winged  and  supported  by  lotus-flowers.  The  forepart  and  one  foreleg 
of  the  scarab  has  been  broken  away,  but  doubtless  it  held  the  disc  of  the  sun, 
completing  the  king's  name. 

On  carefully  removing  a  little  more  of  the  dust  from  the  chest,  I  found  the 
gold  shell,  fig.  4.  The  cartouche  of  gold  wire,  which  is  soldered  on  to  the  shell,  is 
oi Kha-kau-ra,  Senusert  III,  and  has  a  uraeus  on  each  side  of  the  cartouche. 

Below  this,  again,  was  the  pectoral,  fig.  2.  This  was  made  by  perforating  a 
gold  plate,  and  soldering  on  strips  of  gold  in  the  form  of  the  design.  Each  of  the 
cloisons  thus  formed  was  filled  in  with  carnelian,  lazuli,  or  turquoise,  cut  precisely 
to  the  form,  and  fixed  with  cement.  The  back  of  the  plate,  shown  below,  was 
chased  with  details  of  the  figures.  It  is  of  similar  work  to  the  well-known 
jewellery  from  Dahshur,  now  in  the  Cairo  Museum,  though  not  quite  so  elaborate, 
and  it  is  probably  the  work  of  the  same  hands.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the 
middle  sign  is  the  sekhem  ;  and  the  jewel  was  perhaps  presented  by  the  king  as  a 

A  2 


4  The  Jewellery  of  Riqqeh. 

badge  of  the  rank  of  a  noble  who  carried  the  sekliein-t.ce^tK.  On  either  side  are 
two  birds  standing  on  ««<^-signs.  These  birds  may  possibly  be  hawks,  as  Hor  nub, 
or  Horus  on  Nubti  Set,  is  a  well-known  combination  ;  but  the  birds  in  this  design 
are  not  by  any  means  of  the  familiar  conventional  type  of  falcon.  At  the  top 
of  the  pectoral  is  a  pair  of  //Jrt/-eyes,  with  the  sun  between  them  ;  and  the  design 
is  bounded  on  either  side  by  papyri.  The  piece  was  sharply  bent  across  by  the 
fall  of  the  roof,  but  it  has  now  been  flattened  by  the  skill  of  Mr.  Young  at  Oxford. 

The  small  gold  figure  of  the  god  Min,  fig.  3,  was  found  behind  the  neck, 
having  perhaps  fallen  down  when  the  bandages  decayed.  With  it  were  a 
considerable  number  of  cylindrical  and  long  double-bored  beads,  which  were 
grouped  in  the  bead-collars  so  usual  in  the  Xllth  dynasty.  Lower  down  on  the 
chest  were  some  spherical  gilt  beads  (fig.  5),  and  some  very  minute  gold  beads. 
A  few  of  the  collar  beads,  and  one  of  the  semi-circular  pottery  ends  of  the  collar, 
were  thrown  away  in  the  shaft.  I  had  the  whole  contents  of  the  chamber  and 
shaft  sifted  with  a  fine  sieve,  and  I  did  all  the  sifting  of  the  organic  matter  in  the 
chamber  personally.  Nothing  further  was  found  except  one  piece  of  carnelian 
inlay  of  the  eyebrow  and  a  piece  of  the  eye,  which  had  been  knocked  out  of  the 
pectoral  when  it  was  bent  by  the  falling  roof. 

The  whole  of  this  group  is  in  the  University  Museum,  Manchester. 

The  lower  part  of  the  frontispiece  shows  a  group  of  jewellery  from  a  tomb 
of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  The  gold  necklace,  fig.  6,  weighs  477  grains.  The 
centre-piece  is  a  plaque  of  which  both  sides  are  here  shown.  It  is  inscribed 
Sesh  Bera,  "the  Scribe  Bera,"  and  on  the  other  side  Ra-ineti-kheper  Amen-tut,  the 
prenomen  of  Tahutmes  III,  1503-1449  B.C.  Fig.  7  is  a  kohl-pot  of  steatite  covered 
with  dark  green  glaze ;  the  form  is  that  of  a  seated  ape  holding  the  pot,  the  lid 
of  which  is  here  placed  above  it.  Figs.  8,  9,  are  four  gold  rings  used  for  fastening 
the  hair,  weighing  from  105  to  1 19  grains  each.  In  this  tomb  were  also  a  large 
bronze  mirror  and  a  rough  alabaster  bowl.  The  whole  of  this  group  is  now  in  the 
Royal  Scottish  Museum,  Edinburgh. 

At  the  base  is  part  of  a  string  of  carnelian  beads,  characteristic  of  the 
XVIIIth-XIXth  dynasty,  found  broken  up  in  another  tomb. 

A  fuller  account,  with  a  larger  plate  in  colours,  will  appear  in  the  first  of 
the  annual  volumes  Riqqeh  and  Memphis  VI. 

Reginald  Engelbach. 


(    s    ) 


NOTES    ON    SOME    EGYPTIAN    NOME    ENSIGNS 
AND    THEIR    HISTORICAL    SIGNIFICANCE. 

It  is  generally  recognized  that  the  nomes  of  Egypt  are  the  survivals  of  pre-Menite 
States,  and  there  is  abundant  evidence  to  prove  that  many  of  these  States  retained 
in  dynastic  times,  as  nomes,  much  of  their  ancient  character  and  liberties.  A  study 
of  the  nome  ensigns  ought,  therefore,  to  yield  us  some  information  concerning  the 
various  States  of  Egypt  before  the  founding  of  the  Monarchy  by  Menes.  The 
object  of  this  paper  is  to  draw  attention  to  certain  compound  nome  ensigns,  and  to 
suggest  their  historical  signification.  The  religious  significance  of  the  nome  signs 
has  been  already  dealt  with  in  my  paper  on  Some  Prehistoric  Egyptian  Cults,  in  the 
Liverpool  A  finals  of  Archaeology,  Vol.  VI,  p.  1 1 1. 

The  titulary  of  the  early  kings  is  important  in  this  connection.  All  the  kings 
of  the  1st  dynasty  bear  Horus  names,  i.e.,  the  Falcon  (Horus)  of  Hierakonpolis  in 
Upper  Egypt  surmounts  the  palace  facade  in  which  their  names  are  written.  They 
were  primarily  chieftains  of  the  Falcon  Nome,  or  State,  of  Upper  Egypt.  (See 
my  paper  on  The  Horus-Title  of  the  Kings  of  Egypt,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  Vol.  XXVI  (1904),  pp.  295-299.) 


VV 


ODD                    r  n  □ 

In  the  Ilnd  dynasty  we  find  with  Per-ab-sen  that  in  place  of  the  Falcon  upon 
the  palace  fagade  there  is  a  Set-z.n\mdX,  which  certainly  indicates  that  the  chieftains 

of  the    ^     nome  had  gained  the  supremacy  in  Egypt,  that  they  had  overthrown 


the  Falcon  chieftains  and  seized  the  throne.  With  Khasekhemui  the  palace  name 
of  the  king  is  surmounted  by  the  5^/-animal  on  one  side,  and  the  Falcon  on  the 
other,  which  suggests  an  alliance  between  the  royal  families  of  the    -^  and  the 


nomes.     After  Khasekhemui,  the  ^^/-animal  is  never  again  found  above  the 

A  3 


6  Egyptian  Nome  Ensigns. 

palace  name  of  a  king,  but  the  Falcon  invariably  appears  upon  it.  Another  nome 
ensign  appears  over  the  palace  name  of  Menes'  queen,  Hotep  (see  Fig.  i):  this  is 
the  ensign  of  the  Saite  Nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  suggests  that  Hotep  was  the 
hereditary  chieftainess  of  Sais,  the  pre-Menite  capital  of  the  kings  of  Lower  Egypt.* 
By  his  marriage  with  this  royal  lady,  Menes  united  the  thrones  of  Upper  and  Lower 
Egypt. 

On  the  Slate  Palette  of  Narmer  (Menes)  there  is  a  scene  representing  the  king 
smiting  the  chieftain  of  the  Harpoon  kingdom  (in  the  north-western  corner  of  the 
Delta),  and  on  the  verso  of  the  same  palette  there  is  a  scene  showing  Narmer 
inspecting  the  beheaded  bodies  of  his  foes.  Above  this  scene  is  a  large  boat  over 
which  is  a  Harpoon  with  a  Falcon  standing  upon  it  (Fig.  2).  This  Harpoon  upon  a 
boat  is  the  ensign  of  the  Harpoon  Nome  (Fig.  3)  and  the  Falcon  standing  upon  it 
indicates,  according  to  the  usual  Egyptian  convention,  the  conquest  of  the  Harpoon 
kingdom  by  the  chieftain  of  the  Falcon  clan. 

Now  among  the  nome  ensigns  of  Egypt  there  are  several  which  represent  the 
Falcon  .standing  on,  or  by,  the  distinguishing  sign  of  a  nome.  For  example,  the 
ensign  of  the  Western  or  Libyan  Nome  is  W-.     This  is  a  compound  ensign  and 

records  the  conquest  of  the  ft  clan  by  the  Falcon  chieftains.  When  this  conquest 
took  place  we  do  not  know,  but  it  was  probably  some  time  just  before  the 
establishment  of  the  Monarchy,  when  the  Falcon  army  were  pushing  their  way  up 
to  the  Mediterranean.     Another  nome  ensign  surmounted  by  a  Falcon  is  that  of 

the  Oryx  nome  "^^   .     This  ensign  with  the  Falcon  upon  the  back  of  the  Oryx 


only  occurs  in  late  inscriptions.  The  Oryx  was  one  of  the  Setian  animals  and  it 
was  perhaps  during  the  wars  of  the  "  Followers  of  Horus  "  {i.e.,  the  Falcon  people) 
with  the  Set  clan,  towards  the  end  of  the  Hnd  dynasty,  that  this  conquest  took 
place.  To  the  east  of  the  Oryx  Nome  there  was  a  small  district  with  Org  m. 
for  its  ensign  {Beni  Hasan,  I,  PI.  XXV,  1.  35).  Here,  perhaps,  was  a  small  colony 
of  the  J^-  clan  (see  next  page)  from  the  Delta,  which  had  been  vanquished  by  the 
Falcon  people. 

To  the  south  of  Middle  Egypt  there  were  two  large  nomes  having  for  their 

0  C^ 

ensigns  ^\^     and  ^^=^  respectively.     Here  in   prehistoric   times  was   probably  a 


great  5^  "  Cerastes  "-worshipping  clan,  which  was  vanquished  by  an  expedition 
from  the     i     Herakleopolitan  and   i^^Xoite  people,  the  former  taking  possession 


of  the  land  on  the  western  bank,  the  latter,  the  land  on  the  eastern  bank.     In 
historic  times  there  are  several  indications  of  the  close  relationship  between  the 

Hetakleopolitans  and  the  people  of  the  ^     nome.^ 


'  The  names  of  certain  of  these  pre-Menite  kings  are  found  in  the  top  register  of  the  Palermo 
Stone.    The  determinative  used  in  writing  their  names  is  the  king  wearing  the  Neith  crown  %,  . 

'  That  the  chieftains  of  Siut  were  the  powerful  adherents  of  the  Herakleopolitan  kings  is  well 
known,  but  there  is  a  significant  passage  in  the  inscription  of  Kheti  II  (Griffith,  Siut  and 
Der  Rifeh,  PI.  XV,  1.  2)  dealing  with  the  canal  of  his  district,  in  which  he  says  that  he  "brought  a 


Egyptian  Nome  Ensigns.  7 

Turning  now  to  the  Delta  nomas  we  find  a  remarkable  group  of  compound 
ensigns,  in  which,  behind  the  distinguishing  sign  of  the  nome,  there  is  a  figure  of  a 
Bull.  In  the  Old  Kingdom  there  were  four  of  these  ensigns,  and  later  a  fifth 
appears.     These  are  : — 


(0^^-      (2)  ^^,  var.  ^^.     (3)^'^.     (4)1^.     (S)  O 


^ 


( 1 )  A  late  variant  of  the  first  is  1^5  >  ^"^  the  name  of  the  capital  of  the  nome 

for  which  the  ensign  stood  was  j  s=3  J  q  Tb-ntr,  the  Greek  Sebennytos,  the 
Arabic  Samanild.  Tb-ntr  means  the  "  Divine  Calf,"  and  this  was  the  sacred  animal 
of  the    ^"VWJ    nome. 

(2)  The  second  ensign  has  been  understood  to  mean  the  nome  of  the  "  Wild 
Bull,"  the  Bull  of  the  f^-^^  or  desert  (Griffith  in  Ptah-hetep  II,  p.  27).      On  the 

analogy  of  p?^  ^^  we  ought,  I  believe,  to  take  the  (^^  or  r^^^^  as  being  the  cult 

object  of  the  people  of  the   nome.     The  sacred   name   of  its  capital  was    '--^r- 

(var.  *-«-  ),  and  as  we  know  that  there  was  an  important  ^Q.  (van  ^^ )  cult^ 

the   [^£1  (or  fw/i)  in  this  ensign  clearly  stands  for  the  ^^  (or  ^^)  cult. 

(3)  The  third  ensign    is   usually   spoken   of  as   that   of  the   "  Black    Bull " 
(Griffith  in  Ptah-hetep  II,  p.  27).     The  name  of  its  capital,  however,  is  sometimes 

written  s^-  which  on  the  analogy  of  (l)  and  (2)  suggests  that  there  was  a  cult  of 

the  C2  •     What  was  this    .gj   cult  ?     The  reading  of  the  sign  gives  us 


or  (I  ^3:^  ^v  ^  which  is  a  well-known  name  for  the  shield.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts ' 
we  actually  find  ^in  =  fl,  i.e.,  it  is  a  word-sign  for  the  slender  parrying  shield  which 
is  figured  in  early  inscriptions  in  the  compound  nome-ensign^^.  This  compound 
nome  ensign  consists  of  two  originally  separate  cults  (i)  the  H-shield  Q.km)  and 
(2)  the   crossed   arrows  f^  («')•     For  *"   Egyptian   shield   cult   we   have   the 


authority  of  Aristides,  who  mentions  that  there  was  a  district  in  Egypt  sacred  to 
Athena  (Neith)  where  shields  were  dedicated,  but  he  unfortunately  does  not  give 
us  the  name  of  the  place.     Now  Neith  had  a  temple  in  ^'^,  and  as  we  have  seen 

£3  =  W ,  it  seems  probable  that  '^-or-    is  the  district  to  which  Aristides  alludes ; 
U  q'O 

gift  for  this  city  (/>.,  Siut),  in  which  there  were  no  families  of  the  Northland,  nor  people  of  Middle 
Egypt."  Breasted,  commenting  on  this  passage  {Ancient  Records,  I,  407,  note  b)  says:— "The 
remarkable  statement  perhaps  means  that  no  forced  labor  was  employed  on  the  canal,  from  any 
part  of  Egypt  composing  the  Herakleopolitan  kingdom,  viz.,  the  Northland  (Delta)  and  Middle 

Egypt.""  It  means,  I  think,  that  the  colonists  from  the  ^^  nome  (in  the  Delta),  or  from  the    V 


nome  (in   Middle  Egypt),  who  resided  in  the  nome  were  exempted  from  all  forced  labour  on 
the  canals. 

•  On  this  cult  see  my  paper  in  the  Liverpool  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology,  Vol.  I, 
pp.  24  et  seqq. 

'  Ed.  Sethe,  252,  431.    Compare  also    jj    "^s*  (227)  for    i^  ^  ^=«  . 

A  4 


8  Eg)'ptian  Nome  Ensigns. 

that  it  was,  in  fact,  the  scat  of  an  early  shield  cult.  Thus,  I  take  it,  in  the 
nome  ensign  ^^  ^^  the  ^1:3  is  a  word-sign  for  the  cult-object  of  the  nome. 

(4)  Regarding  the  geographical  position  of  the  ^^  J^  (F'g-  4)  nome  we  have 

no  evidence ;  but  that  it  was  in  the  Delta,  and  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  other  "  Bull  "  nomes,  is  probable.     The  cult-object  here  is  clearly  a  sickle. 

(5)  The  fifth  ensign,  which  first  appears  in  the  New  Kingdom,  has  a  Q-sign  in 

front  of  the  Bull,  and  the  name  of  this  noma's  capital  was  8    1  j  ^  Hsb-t,  which  is 

one  of  the  readings  of  the  Q-sign.  This  would  lead  one  to  suppose  that  there  had 
been,  at  some  time,  a  cult  of  the  Q.  Whatever  this  Q  represents  does  not  concern 
us  here,  but  the  interesting  fact  is  that  the  sign  serves  to  differentiate  the  nome 
ensign    O  ^  from  the  other  ensigns  of  this  "  Bull  "  group. 

Now  in  the  "  Bull "  ensigns  that  we  have  been  studying  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  Bull  stands  behind,  and  is  moreover  figured  on  a  much  larger  scale  than 
the  distinguishing  cult-sign.  The  Bull  was,  we  know,  a  very  important  cult-animal 
of  the  Central  Delta,  and  indeed  the  Central  Delta  district  is  sometimes  represented 
by  the  Bull  upon  a  perch  without  any  distinguishing  sign  before  it.  This  last 
fact,  and  the  occurence  of  the  Bull  upon  the  five  ensigns  mentioned  above,  suggests 
that  a  Bull-worshipping  clan  had  become  supreme  in  the  Central  Delta  in  pre- 
Menite  times.  On  several  of  the  archaic  Slate  Palettes  the  king  is  actually 
figured  in  the  likeness  of  a  Bull,  and  from  the  IVth  dynasty  onwards  he  is  often 
called  the  ^  "the  Strong  Bull."  In  these  Delta  "Bull"  names  we  have,  I 
believe,  evidence  of  a  pre-Menite  "  Bull  "  kingdom. 

Before  concluding  these  brief  notes  on  the  nome  ensigns  I  may  bring  forward 
one  more  fact  that  is  of  interest  concerning  them.  A  certain  number  of  the 
ensigns  are  surmounted  by  the  ostrich  feather  ;  this  feather  appears  not  to  be  a  sign 
of  conquest  but  an  indication  of  race.  It  was  the  characteristic  symbol  of  Libyan 
tribes,  and  whenever  it  appears  above  an  ensign  it  indicates  a  colony  of  Libyan 
people ;  in  other  words,  the  ensign  that  it  surmounts  was  originally  a  Libyan  cult. 

Percy  E.  Newberry. 

Note. — In  connection  with  the  preceding  paper  it  may  be  observed  that  of 
the  Bull  nomes  discussed  here  VI,  X,  XI,  XII,  the  evidence  of  the  historical 
development  is  that  X,  Athribis,  Ka  kern,  is  the  original  centre.  It  was  the  only 
one  of  these  which  had  the  festival  of  the  Corn-Osiris  {Historical  Studies,  VIII). 
Nomes  VI,  Xois,  Ka-khas,  and  XII,  Sebcnnytus,  Ka-theb,  appear  next,  just  before 
the  order  of  the  nomes  was  finally  arranged  in  river  lines.  Lastly  came  XI, 
Pharbaithos,  Ka-heseb,  a  region  where  Set  was  still  the  deity  in  historic  times. 

These  four  nomes  occupy  the  middle  Delta,  and  with  them  must  be  grouped 
by  its  position  IX,  Busiris,  which  had  one  of  the  greater  relics  of  Osiris,  and  so 
preceded  VI,  XI,  and  XII,  in  its  growth.  That  Osiris  could  be  looked  on  as 
a  bull  is  shown  by  Osiris  of  Sheten  Pharbaithos  being  called  "the  bull" 
(De  Roug£,  Geog.  Basse  Eg.,  70). 

As  to  the  ostrich  feather,  though  a  Libyan  sign,  it  also  seems  to  be  a  divine 
sign  in  early  times,  appearing  in  the  1st  dynasty  on  the  backs  of  animals  that 
were  worshipped.  Perhaps  it  owes  this  meaning  to  its  being  the  shed-shed,  the 
vehicle  of  the  soul  mounting  to  heaven. 

F.  P, 


(    9    ) 


MOON-CULT^ IN   SINAI    ON   THE   EGYPTIAN   MONUMENTS. 


The  monuments  found  in  Sinai  contain  information  which  points  to  the  existence 
of  moon-worship  in  the  Peninsula  at  a  remote  period  in  history.  These  records 
consist  of  rocl<  tablets  which  were  engraved  by  the  Pharaohs  from  the  1st  to  the 
XlXth  dynasty,  over  the  mines  which  they  worked  at  Wady  Maghara,  and  of 
remains  of  various  kinds  discovered  in  the  temple  ruins  of  the  neighbouring 
Sarbut  el-Khadem  or  Serablt.  The  Egyptians  went  to  Sinai  primarily  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  copper  and  turquoise,  which  are  found  in  a  ferruginous  layer 
that  appears  in  the  mountainous  district  of  the  western  part  of  the  Peninsula. 

The  mines  at  Serabit  lie  in  the  vicinity  of  two  adjacent  caves  facing  an 
extensive  site  of  burning,  which  has  the  peculiarities  of  the  high-places  of  which  we 
hear  so  much  in  the  Bible.  These  caves  formed  a  sanctuary  which,  judging  from 
what  is  known  of  ancient  sanctuaries  in  Arabia  generally,  was  at  once  a  shrine  and 
a  store-house,  presumably  in  the  possession  of  a  priesthood  or  clan,  who,  in  return 
for  offerings  brought  to  the  shrine,  gave  either  turquoise  itself,  or  the  permission  to 
mine  it  in  the  surrounding  district.  The  sanctuary,  like  other  sanctuaries  in 
Arabia,  was  under  the  patronage  of  a  female  divinity,  the  representative  of  nature- 
worship,  and  one  of  the  numerous  forms  of  Ishthar.  In  the  Xllth  dynasty,  when 
the  Egyptians  gained  a  permanent  foothold  at  Serabit,  they  identified  this  divinity 
as  their  own  goddess  Hat-hor.  The  figure  of  Hat-hor  appears  again  and  again  on 
the  wall-decorations  of  the  temple  buildings ;  her  head  surmounts  the  columns  of  a 
chamber  in  front  of  the  cave,  and  in  the  inscriptions  she  is  called,  at  first,  "  mistress 
of  the  turquoise  country  ";  and  later,  simply  "  mistress  of  turquoise." 

There  are  many  Hathors  in  Egypt,  but  the  form  that  is  shown  in  Sinai  is 
Hathor  with  a  headdress  of  cow's  horns  which  enclose  the  orb  of  the  full  moon. 
The  form   is   familiar   in    Egypt  also,  and   the  association  of   Hathor  with  the 
moon-cult  at  home  was  apparently  the 
reason    why   she    was    chosen    as    the 
Egyptian  representative   of  the  female 
divinity  of  Serabit  in  Sinai. 

Hathor  appears  on  the  monuments 
of  Serabit  from  the  Xllth  dynasty 
onwards.  In  one  instance  we  find  her 
represented  also  at  Wady  Maghara. 
The  Egyptian  monuments  at  Wady 
Maghara  consist  of  tablets  that  were 
carved    on   the   living   rock    above    the 

mines,  in  order  to  commemorate  the  hold  which  the  Pharaohs  here  gained  over 
the  country.  The  tablet  on  which  Hathor  is  seen  is  of  Amen-em-hat  III  (XII,  6) 
and  is  throughout  of  a  peaceful  character.  The  king  is  represented  facing  the 
ibis-headed  figure  of  Thoth,  who  holds  out  to  him  a  staff  on  which  are  the  aiikh 
and  the  dad,  signs  of  life  and  stability,  and  Hathor  stands  behind  Thoth. 

This  introduction  of  Thoth  likewise  bears  on  the  moon-cult  of  the  Peninsula, 
for  the  Egyptian  god  Thoth   was   originally  a  lunar  divinity.     His  chief  shrine 


5.  Amenemhat  III,  Thoth  and  Hat-hor.    Maghareb. 
{Researches  in  Sinai,  Fig.  55.) 


lO 


Moon- Cult  in  Sinai. 


during  historical  times  was  at  Hermopolis  in  Lower  Egypt,  where  he  was  repre- 
sented as  ibis-headed.  But  he  was  also  represented  under  the  form  of  a  baboon, 
or  a  baboon  was  associated  with  him. 

The  tablet  of  Amen-em-hat  III  seems  to  indicate  that  Thoth,  in  this  capacity 
of  a  lunar  divinity  and  as  the  representative  of  the  moon-worshippers  of  the 
Peninsula  generally,  was  well  disposed  towards  the  Pharaoh  of  Egypt ;  Hathor, 
mistress  of  the  turquoise,  was  in  attendance  on  Thoth  as  the  representative  of 
the  neighbouring  district  of  Serabit. 

This  interpretation  of  the  scene  is  confirmed  by  earlier  monuments.  A  rock- 
tablet  of  Ra-en-user  (V,  6)  at  Wady  Maghara,  which  is  much  broken,  shows  the 
figure  of  Thoth,  who  probably  faced  the  king.  On  the  other  part  of  the  tablet 
the  king  is  seen  smiting  the  enemy,  who  crouches  before  him,  and  a  large  libation 
vase,  supported  on  three  ankhs,  emblems  of  life,  is  accompanied  by  words  to  the 
effect  that  "the  lord  of  foreign  lands  gave  coolness."  Here  Thoth,  the  lunar 
divinity,  also  appears  in  friendly  relation  with  the  king;  the  king  smites  the 
enemy,  and  by  doing  so  gains  the  approval  of  the  lord  of  foreign  lands. 


6.  "  Khnumu-KHUFU,  the  Great  God  smiting  the  Anu"  before  Thoth. 
Wady  Maghareh.    (Palestine  Exploration  Fund.) 


Again  the  tablet  at  Wady  Maghara,  of  King  Khufu  (IV,  2)  the  great  pyramid- 
builder  (now  unfortunately  destroyed),  represented  the  king  smiting  the  enemy, 
and  doing  so  actually  before  the  ibis-headed  figure  of  Thoth  (Fig.  6).  The  king 
here  again  is  acting  in  agreement  with  the  lunar  divinity,  whom  he  is  honouring 
by  smiting  his  foes. 

Other  finds  point  in  the  same  direction,  confirming  the  belief  that  the 
Egyptians  looked  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Sinai  as  moon-worshippers. 


Moon- Cult  in  Sinai. 


II 


Thus,  the  figure  of  a  baboon,  the  animal  or  incarnation  of  Thoth,  was 
discovered  at  Serabit  during  the  excavations  of  1905-1906.  The  figure  is  of 
sandstone,  worked  in  a  rude  style,  and  was  found  in  the  holy  cave  itself  This 
figure  is  now  in  Oxford.  Another  figure  of  a  baboon,  life-size,  and  worked  in 
limestone  with  an.  inscription  around  its  base,  came  out  of  one  of  the  store- 
chambers  that  adjoined  the  cave.  If  I  mistake  not,  it  was  of  the  Middle  Kingdom. 
These  baboons,  emblems  of  the  lunar  divinity  in  Egypt,  were  presumably 
considered  for  this  reason  suitable  offerings  to  the  sacred  shrine  of  a  people  who 
were  themselves  moon-worshippers. 

The  rude  figure  of  the  baboon  that  was  found  at  Serabit  is  similar  in  character 
and  workmanship  to  figures  of  baboons  that  were  found  at  the  primitive  shrines 
of  Abydos  and  Hierakonpolis  in  Upper  Egypt.  The  baboon  was  here,  perhaps, 
originally  the  holy  animal,  the  cult  of  which  was  overlaid  in  predynastic  times  by 
the  cult  of  the  god  Osiris.  Many  figures  of  baboons^  over  sixty  in  one  instance, 
were  found  in  the  earliest  levels  of  the  temple  at  Abydos,  that  were  excavated  in 
the  winter  of  1903-1904.  Their  position  showed  that  they  had  been  discarded  at 
an  early  period  of  history.  The  likeness  in  character  of  the  baboon  found  in  Sinai 
to  the  baboons  found  in  the  early  levels  at  Abydos  and  Hierakonpolis  suggested 
that  the  emblem  of  the  baboon  was  carried  to  Sinai  at  an  early  period  in  history. 


7.  Sandstone  Baboon. 
Serabit.     (A'.  Sin.,  127.) 


8.  Glazed  Baboon. 
Hierakonpolis.     (Univ.  Coll.  L.) 


9.  Glared  Baboon. 
Abydos.    (Univ.  Coll.  L.] 


The  Egyptians  from  the  earliest  times  approached  the  shrine  at  Serabit  in 
the  character  of  quasi-worshippers,  and  judging  from  the  remains  and  offerings 
that  were  found  in  the  caves  themselves,  and  in  the  adjoining  row  of  store- 
chambers,  their  relations  with  the  centre  were  throughout  of  a  friendly  character. 
For  here  already  King  Sneferu  (III,  9)  deposited  as  a  gift  the  figure  of  a  hawk, 
his  favourite  emblem,  found  likewise  in  his  funeral  temple  in  Egypt,  the  inscription 
and  workmanship  of  which  show  it  to  be  a  contemporary  monument. 

Sneferu  (111,9)  who  thus  figured  as  a  quasi-worshipper  at  Serabit,  appears 
as  a  smiter  of  the  enemy  at  Wady  Maghara.  On  his  rock-tablet  he  is  seen  as 
a  smiter,  wearing  a  headdress  that  consists  of  a  double  plume  that  rises  from 
a  pair  of  horns.  The  double  plume  is  well  known,  but  such  horns  are  foreign  to 
Egypt.     Again  these  horns  point  in  the  direction  of  moon-worship,  for  they  recall 


12  Moon- Cult  in  Sinai. 

the  lunar  horns  that  are  worn  by  the  moon-god  and  his  devotees   on   ancient 
Babylonian  seal-cyh'nders. 

On  the  scene  of  smiting,  as  we  see  it  represented  at  Wady  Maghara,  the 
Pharaoh  wields  his  mace  over  the  enemy  whom  he  holds  by  his  top-knot,  together 
with  a  spear  and  a  curved  object  which  he  seems  to  have  taken  from  him.  The 
curved  object  is  probably  a  boomerang,  or  throw-stick  ;  the  man  is  of  Semitic 
type,  not  unlike  the  better  Bedawy  of  to-day.  The  earliest  tablets  at  Wady 
Maghara   contain    little  wording    beyond    the   titles   of   the  king.     But  Sneferu 


i'l 


It. 


■/-^\ 


yii 


] 


/ 


J 


10.  "  Sneferu,  the  Great  God,  ravaging  the  Lands,"  before  his  ia  Neb-maot. 
(Researches  in  Sinai,  Fig.  50.) 

(111,6)  who  wears  the  lunar  horns  is  called  "great  god  smiting  countries,"  or 
barbarians ;  King  Khufu  (IV,  9)  who  slays  the  enemy  before  Thoth  is  called 
a  "smiter  of  the  Anu,"  Sahura  (V,  2),  and  later  kings  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth 
dynasties  are  described  as  smiting  the  Mentu.  The  Anu  are  mentioned  on  the 
Palermo  Stone  in  connection  with  a  king  whose  name  is  broken  away,  but  who 
is  pro.bably  Den-Setui,  fifth  king  of  the  1st  dynasty,  as  he  is  known  to  have  made 
expeditions  into  Sinai.  The  Mentu  was  the  ordinary  word  that  was  applied  by 
the  Egyptians  to  the  Asiatics.  As  the  Pharaohs  were  acting  in  concert  with 
moon-worshippers  in  Sinai  in  attacking  the  Anu  and  the  Mentu,  we  are  left  to 
infer  that  these  were  not  moon -worshippers  themselves. 

The   Egyptians   went   to   Sinai    in   order   to    secure    turquoise    and   copper. 
Turquoise  has  been  found  in  Egypt  in  Neolithic  graves ;  for  copper  there  would 


Moon-Cult  in  Sinai.  13 

be  an  increasing  demand  on  all  sides  from  the  close  of  the  Neolithic  age.  The 
Egyptians  were  always  on  friendly  terms  with  Serabit,  the  centre  of  the  turquoise 
district.  It  was  at  Maghara,  between  the  1st  and  the  Vth  dynasty,  that  they 
came  into  conflict  with  the  invading  Semites  who  disputed  with  them  the  possession 
of  the  mines. 

The  association  of  Sinai  with  moon-worship  is  in  keeping  with  what  is  known 
from  Semitic  sources. 

The  Moon-god  in  early  Babylonia  was  known  under  various  names  and 
epithets.  As  Ea,  or  Ya,  he  was  looked  upon  as  the  oldest  Semitic  god  of  Babylonia, 
to  which  his  coming  brought  the  artificial  culture  of  the  date-palm,  probably  by 
way  of  the  Persian  Gulf  Ea,  like  Thoth,  is  esteemed  the  source  of  wisdom  and 
culture,  and  Eabani,  his  devotee,  was  represented  wearing  lunar  horns  similar  to 
those  that  are  worn  by  Sneferu.  A  later  name  of  the  Moon-god  among  the 
Semites  was  Sin.  As  Sin,  the  name  forms  part  of  the  name  of  Naram-Sin,  king  of 
Agade,  whose  date  is  about  3750  B.C.,  and  whose  actions,  as  we  learn  from  his 
Annals,  were  considered  in  the  light  of  lunar  influence.  The  Moon-god,  as  Sin, 
had  a  sanctuary  at  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  the  starting  place  of  Terah  and  Abraham, 
and  a  sanctuary  at  Haran,  in  Northern  Syria,  the  place  to  which  they  migrated  ; 
and  the  name  Sinai  itself  is  connected  by  scholars  with  Sin.  The  name  appears  in 
three  forms  in  the  Bible  in  the  list  of  the  stations  of  Exodus,  which  stand  in 
Chapter  33  of  the  Book  of  Numbers,  which  is  apportioned  by  the  higher  critics  to 
the  Elohist,  the  earlier  source  of  the  Hexateuch.  There  is  named  the  wilderness 
of  Sin,  the  desert  of  Sinai,  and  the  wilderness  of  Zin — places  that  lie  in  different 
parts  of  the  Peninsula — which  point  to  a  general  association  of  the  country  with 
moon-worship. 

The  list  of  the  stations  of  Exodus  has  the  appearance  of  a  contemporary 
record.  It  establishes  the  association  of  moon-worship  with  the  Peninsula  about 
1300  B.C.  The  Egyptian  monuments,  as  we  have  seen,  carry  this  association  several 
thousand  years  further  back  in  history. 

LiNA    ECKENSTEIN. 


(  14  ) 


THREE  STELAE  AT  GRAZ. 

As  far  as  I  was  able  to  ascertain  the  Egyptian  monuments  at  Graz  have  never 
been  studied.  Years  ago  Prof.  Strzygowski  sent  me  photographs  of  the  three 
stelae  which  I  am  publishing  here.  The  most  remarkable  one  is  Fig.  ii,  showing 
King  Sebekenisaf  presenting  wine  or  some  other  liquid,  to  the  god  Ptah-Sokaris, 
of  whom  the  king  is  beloved.  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  make  out  which  of  the 
Sebekemsaf  kings  of  the  Xlllth  dynasty  is  the  king  here  mentioned.  The  style 
of  the  monument  (H.  042  m.,  B.  0"22  m.)  shows  the  somewhat  rude  art  of  the 
late  Middle  Kingdom.     Limestone,  from  Thebes. 


II.  Sebekemsaf  offering  to  Puh-Seker  who 
gives  him  life. 


12.  Mertitha  making  a  dflnk -offering  to  floraikhuti, 
Great  God,  Lord  of  Heaven. 


Fig.  12  is  a  small  limestone  stela  which  is  of  the  rough  work  usually  found 
in  the  late  New  Empire.  The  dead,  the  son  of  Nesqa'min,  Merti-r-za'  is  praying 
before  Horus.  For  the  names  compare  LlEBLEIN,  Dtctionnaire,  2414  and  241 1, 
2346.     The  style  of  the  relief,  bad  as  it  is,  hardly  allows  us  to  put  the  monument 

later  than  700  B.C.;  in  this  case  the  writing  ^^^^  ^  ^^  ^  for  "^°^  <=>  ^^ , 
is  interesting  as  one  of  the  oldest  examples  of  the  use  of  the  Ptolemaic  system  of 
writing  in  private  names.     No  traces  of  colour.     H.  0205  m.,  B.  0-125  m. 


Three  Stelae  at  Graz. 


IS 


Perhaps  the  finest  piece  of  the  three,  from  an  artistic  point  of  view,  is  the 
portion  of  a  limestone  stela,  Fig.  1 3,  H.  0*33  m.,  B.  0'28  m.  In  the  upper  register  one 
named  MiNEPTAH-NFU-'EA'  (Merneptah-nefu-oa)  prays  to  Osiris  Chenthamenthes 
Onnofris  (Khentamenti  Un-nefer).  Below,  a  priest  with  a  leopard's  skin  round 
his  shoulders  burns  incense  to  Osiris.  The  elegant,  though  not  very  delicate 
work,  points  to  the  XlXth  or  XXth  dynasty.  The  reading  of  the  names  is  not 
certain,  and  I  have  no  hand  copy  of  this  monument. 

Fr.  W.  von  Bissing. 


13.  Merneptah-nefu-oa  adoring  Osiris  Khentamenti  Un-neler. 


(    i6    ) 

EGYPTIAN    BELIEFS    IN    A    FUTURE    LIFE. 
{The  Drew  Lecture,  November,  191 3.) 

The  remote  view  which  we  gain  in  the  literature  and  customs  of  Egypt  is  the 
longest  vista  into  the  growth  of  mind  and  ideas  that  is  open  to  us.  In  no  other 
land  are  there  such  full  written  materials,  such  abundant  details  of  funeral  ritual,  and 
so  complete  an  historical  record  to  fix  the  relation  of  all  the  developments  that  are 
found.  Egypt  is,  therefore,  the  most  favourable  ground  for  studying  the  growth  of 
beliefs  regarding  the  nature  and  the  future  of  the  soul. 

The  beliefs  about  the  soul  are  closely  bound  up  with  the  theology.  The  functions 
of  the  gods  of  different  races  which  entered  the  land,  naturally  determined  the 
relations  of  the  soul  to  the  gods  in  the  future.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  notice  the 
main  changes  in  religious  beliefs,  and  to  refer  to  the  principal  gods  of  each  cycle  ; 
but  our  subject  will  be  simplified  by  avoiding  the  theology  where  it  is  not  essential 
to  the  views  regarding  the  soul. 

In  order  to  realise  the  historical  setting  of  the  growth  of  belief,  we  must  first 
briefly  state  the  periods  of  thought  which  we  have  to  regard  in  this  question, 
beginning  with  what  is  best  known.  In  the  (i)  Christian  Age  there  survived  many 
reflections  of  the  older  faiths,  especially  on  points  not  decided  by  Apostolic  teaching. 
The  (2)  Alexandrian  age  was  greatly  pervaded  by  Syrian,  Persian,  and  Indian 
thought,  as  seen  in  Philo,  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  and  the  Hermetic  books.  The 
rise  of  this  was  doubtless  influenced  by  the  sense  of  personality  and  ethical  right, 
in  the  sixth  to  the  eighth  centuries  B.C.,  seen  in  Ezekiel,  Hesiod,  and  Piankhy  the 
Ethiopian.  In  (3)  the  Age  of  the  conquest  of  Syria  by  the  Thothmides  and 
Ramessides,  1200-1600  B.C.  (which  we  might  call  the  E.xodus  Age),  no  doubt 
Oriental  influences  were  at  work,  mainly  seen  in  the  bursts  of  solar  monotheism 
which  soon  disappeared.  The  so-called  Book  of  the  Dead  was  the  popular 
guide  to  the  future  world  in  this  age.  (4)  The  previous  great  civilisation  of  the 
Xth  to  XVIth  dynasties  shows  a  growth  of  personal  enquiry,  some  agnosticism, 
and  the  development  of  the  belief  in  the  Osirian  Judgment  of  the  Dead.  This 
period  is  put  at  about  2000  to  4000  B.C.,  by  the  uniform  and  consistent  statements 
of  the  Egyptians.  Before  this  was  (5)  the  Pyramid  Period,  4000  to  5000  B.C., 
from  which  we  have  the  long  Pyramid  Texts,  the  earliest  compilation  known,  mostly 
from  much  more  ancient  sources.  Of  the  earlier  stages  we  can  broadly  distinguish 
three ;  these  are  (6)  the  Heliopolitan  eastern  sun-worshippers,  5000-7000  B.C. ; 
(7)  the  western  Osiris-worshippers,  of  7000-8000  B.C.  ;  and  the  (8)  primitive 
animal-worshippers,  perhaps  Palaeolithic,  before  8000  B.C. 

It  may  seem  surprising  to  refer  to  any  religion  in  Palaeolithic  times.  Yet  the 
precision  of  the  funeral  ritual  extends  back  to  the  earliest  Neolithic  graves  that 
we  know  in  Egypt,  and  offerings  accompany  burials  in  Europe  back  to  the  age 
of  the  Cave  men.  The  sun-worship,  which  is  dominant  in  the  Pyramid  Texts, 
cannot  be  due  to  the  Vth  dynasty  in  which  Heliopolis  was  prominent,  but  must 
belong  to  the  much  earlier  rule  there  of  the  Delta  kings.  This  is  shown  by  the 
general  tone  of  the  civilisation  which  underlies  the  religious  texts.  To  take  one 
instance:  the  dead  king  is  often  stated  to  depend  on  reed  floats  to  cross  the 
waters  of  death,  while  boats  and  ships  had  been  familiarly  used  throughout  the 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life.  17 

second  Prehistoric  Age,  5000  to  7000  B.C.  Had  the  magic  texts  originated  later 
than  that,  boats  would  have  been  pre-supposed  in  all  cases,  and  the  more  primitive 
floats  would  not  have  appeared.  Thus  the  sun-worship  ideas  (6)  must  be  put 
as  early  as  we  have  stated,  and  before  those  lie  certainly  two  earlier  strata  of  belief. 
We  have  now  stated  the  general  position  historically. 

The  actual  sources  of  information  are  (a)  the  wide-spread  funerary  customs, 
as  recorded  from  many  excavations ;  (b)  the  Pyramid  Texts,  edited  by  Dr.  Sethe, 
translated  into  French  by  Sir  Gaston  Maspero,  and  discussed  in  English  by 
Prof  Breasted,  in  his  Development  of  Religion  and  Thought  in  Ancient  Egypt, 
(referred  to  as  Br.) ;  (c)  the  Coffin  Texts  published  by  Lacau,  but  not  yet 
translated  ;  (d)  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  best  translated  by  Renouf 

The  earliest  stratum  of  ideas  that  we  can  distinguish  before  the  rise  of  the 
cult  of  Osiris,  or  the  sun-worship,  is  doubtless  an  accumulation  of  several  earlier 
stages :  the  history  of  those  is  beyond  recall.  Whether  we  shall  ever  be  able 
to  distinguish  these  primitive  strata  by  any  contemporary  facts  is  very  doubtful ; 
but  possibly  the  finding  of  some  cemetery  earlier  than  any  yet  known,  or  of  some 
group  of  neighbouring  tribes,  may  show  the  dividing  lines  of  the  periods. 

The  animal-worship,  and  the  most  primitive  deities  reputed  to  be  the  parents 
of  the  gods,  are  the  earliest  ideas  which  we  can  distinguish.  Animism  appears  in 
the  spirit  of  the  tree  which  guards  the  cemetcrj',  and  is  the  Tree-goddess  shown  in 
later  pictures  as  giving  food  and  drink  to  the  dead.  Certainly  the  dead  were 
.suppo.sed  to  have  a  continued  existence,  as  food  offerings  are  found  in  the  very 
earliest  graves.  A  remarkable  idea,  described  later,  is  that  dead  persons  head 
downward  were  malignant,  and  were  enemies  of  the  good  dead  who  stood  upright. 
This  very  crude  idea  was  probably  derived  from  the  symbolism  expressed  in  a 
prehistoric  painting,  where  a  defeated  enemy  is  portrayed  head  downward.  It 
seems  that  this  must  have  originated  in  the  earliest  days  of  savagery,  and  be  part 
of  the  most  primitive  thought  about  the  future  life. 

The  earliest  deities  that  we  can  trace  are  the  feminine  heaven.  Nut,  and  the 
masculine  earth,  Gcb.  It  may  seem  strange  that  the  Nile  and  the  Sun,  the  present 
essentials  of  Egyptian  life,  were  not  the  first  objects  of  worship.  But  the  order  of 
selection  agrees  with  the  conditions  of  the  country  at  that  remote  age.  It  is 
probable  that  rainfall  continued,  and  hunting,  not  agriculture,  was  the  task  of  man, 
until  the  beginning  of  the  prehistoric  Osirian  civilisation.  The  hymn  to  Nut 
preserved  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  regarded  as  the  oldest  fragment  of  the  ritual 
{Br.  95,  148).  It  traces  the  birth  of  the  sky  from  Shu  and  Tefnut,  space  and  fluid 
(aether  and  chaos),  mere  abstractions  which  were  never  worshipped.  The  purpose 
of  the  hymn  is  to  beseech  Nut  to  give  benefits  to  the  deceased  («),  who  is  thus 
supposed  to  have  gone  to  the  sky.  "  Geb  (the  Earth-god)  is  come  to  thee,  O  Nut, 
and  thou  art  become  strong.  Thou  didst  rule  in  the  body  of  thy  mother 
Tefnut  (chaos)  when  thou  wast  not  yet  born  ;  give  («)  life  and  strength  that  he 
may  not  die. 

"Take  rule  in  thy  heart  and  come  forth  from  the  body  of  thy  mother  (chaos)  in 
thy  name  of  Nut  (sky).  Strong  one,  daughter  who  is  ruler  of  her  mother,  and  who 
ari.ses  as  queen  of  the  Delta ;  protect  this  («)  who  is  in  thy  body  that  he  die  not. 

"  O  Great  One  who  is  produced  in  heaven  and  there  rules,  thou  hast  come, 
thou  hast  filled  all  places  with  thy  excellence,  the  whole  land  is  under  thee,  and 
thou  hast  taken  it,  thou  hast  embraced  the  earth  for  thee,  and  all  things  are  in 
thy  arms  ;  grant  this  («)  to  be  like  an  indestructible  star  within  thee. 

ii 


1 8  Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 

"  Thou  art  not  separated  from  Geb  in  thy  name  of  Heaven,  and  thou  protectest 
the  whole  land  in  all  places. 

"  O  Thou  who  stretchest  thyself  above  the  earth,  above  thy  father  Shu  (space, 
or  aether,  which  separated  heaven  from  earth),  and  who  rulest  over  him,  because 
he  loves  thee  and  puts  himself  and  all  things  under  thee ;  seeing  that  thou  hast 
taken  each  god  unto  thee  with  his  boat  in  order  that  they  wander  not  from  thee 
like  stars,  let  not  («)  wander  from  thee  in  thy  name  of  Guardian." 

Here  the  heaven.  Nut,  is  appealed  to  (i)  by  her  vitality,  to  give  life  to 
the  dead  ;  (2)  by  her  ruling  powers,  to  protect  the  dead  ;  (3)  by  her  control 
of  all  things,  to  give  a  place  to  the  dead  like  an  indestructible  star,  that  is, 
one  of  the  circumpolar  stars  that  never  set ;  (4)  by  her  guidance  of  the  gods 
who  sail  in  their  boats  across  the  sky,  to  guard  the  dead  likewise  from  wandering 
away. 

From  this  we  gain  the  first  view  of  the  position  of  the  dead.  They  were 
immortal ;  they  went  to  the  sky,  not  to  the  Earth-god,  Geb ;  they  were  not  to 
suffer  extinction  and  re-birth,  but  to  be  always  above  the  earth  like  the  northern 
stars.  All  this  belongs  to  an  earlier  stage  than  the  Osiris-worship :  to  a  stage 
from  which  Osiris  raised  man  by  teaching  agriculture  and  giving  laws,  according 
to  the  Egyptian  tradition.  It  is  the  stage  of  a  savage  life  of  hunters,  before  the  rise 
of  the  prehistoric  civilisation, — the  stage  when  a  dead  enemy,  turned  head  down- 
ward, became  a  malicious  spirit.  Yet  the  essential  ideas  of  spirit,  of  immortality, 
of  a  life  in  the  sky,  are  all  dominant. 

This  future  life  needed  to  be  sustained,  and  various  provisions  for  its  benefit 
were  placed  in  the  grave.  We  have  not  yet  found  any  graves  dating  back  before 
the  Osirian  Age,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  custom  of  placing  food  and 
weapons  in  the  grave  belongs  to  at  least  as  early  a  stage  as  the  conception  of  the 
dead  going  to  the  Sky-goddess. 

To  this  prc-Osirian  Age  must  also  be  assigned  the  cannibalistic  idea  of  eating 
the  gods  to  acquire  their  qualities.  Such  an  idea  cannot  have  arisen  when  only 
a  few  mighty  anthropomorphic  deities  were  recognised  ;  it  belongs  to  the  half- 
animistic  age,  when  a  multitude  of  spirits  peopled  the  future  life,  and  might  be 
caught  like  cattle.  The  dead  "  is  one  who  eats  men  and  lives  on  gods  "  ;  various 
of  his  ministers  lasso  the  gods,  and  stab  them,  take  out  their  entrails,  cut  them 
up,  and  cook  them.  The  dead  "  is  he  who  eats  their  charms,  and  devours  their 
souls ;  their  great  ones  are  for  his  morning  portion,  their  middle  ones  are  for  his 
evening  portion,  their  little  ones  are  for  his  night  portion,  their  old  men  and  their 
old  women  are  for  his  oven.  It  is  the  Great-Ones- North-of-the-Sky  who  set  for 
him  the  fire  to  the  kettles  containing  them,  with  the  legs  of  their  oldest  ones  as 
fuel"(5r.  128).  It  would  be  impossible  to  put  in  the  Osirian  Period  the  orgies 
from  which  this  feast  is  described  ;  they  obviously  belong  to  the  ages  before  Osiris 
is  said  to  have  civilised  the  Egyptians. 

Connected  with  this  is  also  the  ritual  of  dismemberment  of  the  dead.  The 
allusions  to  this  are  frequent,  even  in  the  comparatively  late  compilation  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  their  literal  detail  when  we  find 
many  instances  of  this  unfleshing  of  the  dead  continuing  through  the  Prehistoric 
Age,  and  even  into  the  Pyramid  Period.  The  reason  asserted  for  this  custom  was 
the  purifying  of  the  dead  from  all  his  evil.  The  reconstruction  of  the  body  is 
often  mentioned,  and  the  returning  of  the  head  to  it. 

We  have  now  noticed  the  main  ideas  which  appear  to  belong  to  the  earliest 
age  that  we  can  trace  ;  they  doubtless  are  really  of  varying  strata  and  sources,  beyond 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life, 


19 


our  present  analysis,  but  at  least  we  may  say  that  they  precede  the  Osiris-  and  the 
Solar-worship,  and  are  probably  earlier  than  the  prehistoric  civilisation. 


14.  Nut,  the  starry  goddess  of  heaven,  overarching  Geb,  the  earth,  covered  with  reeds.     She  is  supported 
by  Shu  (space)  ;  over  her  back  rises  and  sets  the  boat  of  Ra.     (Lanz.,  D.M.,  CLV.) 

When  we  view  the  Osiris  cycle  of  gods,  belonging  to  the  first  prehistoric 
civilisation,  the  earliest  of  them  appears  to  be  Set,  in  later  times  driven  out,  cursed, 
and  extirpated,  yet  strangely  coming  up  again  in  the  name  of  one  of  the  greatest 
kings,  Sety.  The  oldest  myth  about  him  is  that  he  is  in  charge  of  the  ladder  by 
which  the  dead  ascend  to  the  sky  {Br.  153).  This  idea  of  the  ladder  must  belong 
to  the  age  before  the  antagonism  of  the  tribes  of  Set-  and  of  Osiris-worshippers, 
which  caused  Set  to  be  proscribed ;  and  also  before  the  rivalry  of  the  Set  and  Horus 
tribes.     To  the  dawn  of  the  Osirian  Period  must  belong,  then,  the  belief  in  some  aid 

of  steps  or  ladders  to  get  up  to  Nut, 
the  heaven,  where  the  dead  were  to 
dwell.  This  idea  long  survived,  as  in 
the  XXII nd  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  we  read  of  Osiris  "  who  is  at  the 
head  of  the  staircase,"  and  in  Chapter 
CXLIX  the  dead  says:  "I  raise  my 
ladder  up  to  the  sky  to  see  the  gods," 
with  a  vignette  of  a  flight  of  stairs. 
Amulets  of  stairs  are  found  as  late  as 
the  Greek  Period. 

The  Osiris-worshippers  always  re- 
garded the  west  as  sacred  and  blessed, 
and  probably,  therefore,  it  was  the  home- 
land whence  the  Osiris  tribes  came  into  Egypt.  The  dead  are  laid  facing  the  west, 
according  to  the  custom  of  looking  to  the  home-land  familiar  among  other  races. 

We  reach  at  this  point  the  beginning  of  the  continuous  civilisation  of  Egypt 
which  can  be  traced  every  generation  onward  in  unbroken  order.     The  constant 

B  2 


15,  The  stairway  up  to  heaven  guarded  by  Sekhmet. 
Papyrus  of  Asar-auf-ankh.     (Lefs.,  Todl.,  LXXII.) 


io 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


position  of  the  dead  in  the  graves,  head  to  south,  on  left  side,  facing  west,  and  the 
constant  position  in  which  the  principal  kinds  of  offering  jars  are  placed,  all  show 
that  a  definite  ritual  of  burial  existed,  and  fixed  views  regarding  the  future. 


l6.  Contracted  burial  of  the  age  ol  Mena  with  offcrimj  jais.     (Grave  1870,  Tarkhan.) 


•  The  great  feature  of  the  Osiris  mythology  was  his  resuscitation  after  death.  In 
the  Pyramid  Texts  we  read  :  "  Though  thou  departest,  thou  comest  again  ;  though 
thou  sleepest,  thou  wakest  again  ;  though  thou  diest,  thou  livest  again."  Isis  and 
Nebhat  are  "  thy  two  great  and  mighty  sisters,  who  have  put  together  thy  flesh,  who 
have  fastened  together  thy  limbs,  who  have  made  thy  two  eyes  to  shine  again  in  thy 
head"  {Br.  32).  Hence,  as  the  king  and  the  dead  were  identified  with  Osiris,  they 
shared  in  the  same  revival.  The  same  process  of  reconstitution  was  needful  for  all 
the  dead  as  for  Osiris,  probably  descending  from  the  custom  of  unfleshing  and 


Egyptian   Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life.  21 

cleansing  the  bones.  As  Breasted  sums  up :  "  We  may  summarise  it  all  in  the 
statement  that  after  the  resuscitation  of  the  body  there  was  a  mental  restoration,  or 
a  reconstitution  of  the  faculties,  one  by  one,  attained  especially  by  the  process  of 
making  the  deceased  a  '  soul,'  in  which  capacity  he  again  existed  as  a  person, 
possessing  all  the  p<iWers  that  would  enable  him  to  subsist  and  survive  in  the  life 
hereafter." 


17.  HoRUs  and  Isis  resuscitaling  ihe  mummy  of  Osiris  Unneker.     Abydos. 

The  development  of  the  Osirian  Kingdom  of  the  Dead,  and  all  its  consequences, 
begins  to  appear  in  the  Osirian  revival  after  the  Pyramid  Texts,  and  so  does  not 
come  into  our  view  of  the  dead  in  the  prehistoric  time. 

The  next  change  was  an  invasion  from  the  East  which  brought  in  many  new 
elements  of  the  second  Prehistoric  Age.  The  material  culture  changed  considerably, 
the  influences  are  proto-Semitic  or  Eastern,  rather  than  Western  as  before.  The 
sun  worship  of  the  god  Ra  became  dominant,  and  probably  centred  at  Heliopolis. 
Osiris  had  to  give  way  ;  "  Ra-Atum  (Ra  of  the  East)  does  not  give  thee  to  Osiris. 
Osiris  numbers  not  thy  heart,  he  gains  not  power  over  thy  heart.  Ra-Atum  gives 
thee  not  to  Horus.  He  numbers  not  thy  heart,  he  gains  not  power  over  thy  heart. 
Osiris !  thou  hast  not  gained  power  over  him  ;  thy  son  (Horus)  has  not  gained 
power  over  him."  Osiris  was  even  arraigned  and  judged  by  Ra  in  the  Great  Hall 
of  Justice  at  Heliopolis. 

The  East  was  the  sacred  region  of  these  people  from  the  East.  The  dead  had 
to  go  eastwards  to  join  the  Sun-god,  and  they  were  warned  from  going  westward. 
On  the  eastern  border  of  the  land  lay  the  Lily-lake  over  which  the  dead  must  pass. 
Sometimes  he  is  said  to  be  ferried  in  a  boat,  and  the  boatman  has  to  be  bribed  or 
cheated  into  taking  him  over ;  sometimes  he  has  to  paddle  over  on  two  floats  of 
reeds,  or  even  to  swim,  an  idea  older  than  the  shipbuilding  time  of  the  second 
Prehistoric  Age. 

Amulets  became  common  in  this  time,  showing  that  magic  was  a  prominent 
idea  ;  and  the  dead  possessed  of  amulets  could  thus  compel  the  powers  in  the  future 
to  help  him,  and  be  preserved  from  evil.  The  idea  of  the  necessity  of  purification 
before  being  fitted  for  the  heavenly  life  comes  forward  in  this  period,  but  how  far  it 
was  added  to  in  the  Pyramid  Period  it  is  difficult  to  say.     The  bathing  in  the  sacred 

B  3 


22  Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 

lake  was  probably  an  early  idea,  and  this  bath  in  Lethe  was  considered  to  purify 
the  dead  so  as  to  fit  him  for  entry  into  the  heavenly  kingdom  of  Ra. 

The  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  dynastic  race  doubtless  introduced  some  fresh 
ideas  as  to  the  future  life.  In  the  theology  it  brought  in  the  abstract  gods  :  the 
Creator,  Ptah,  and  the  personification  of  Truth,  Maat ;  the  universal  Father  Min, 
and  the  Great  Mother,  Hat-hor.  But  in  the  burials  there  was  only  a  gradual  change 
in  the  direction — from  facing  west  to  facing  east.  The  reason  that  no  more  striking 
changes  are  seen  may  be  that  there  had  been  a  gradual  infiltration  of  the  fresh 
race — as  shown  by  bone  measurements — and  therefore  there  was  no  great  difference 
when  the  political  power  passed  over  to  the  later  comers.  The  new  gods  were  not 
associated  with  any  views  of  the  future,  and  therefore  it  may  be  that  the  belief  in 
immortality  was  not  held  strongly  by  the  dynastic  people,  and  the  older  beliefs  were 
not  much  changed. 

On  reaching  the  Pyramid  Age,  there  is  the  great  mass  of  the  texts  engraved  on 
the  walls  of  the  Pyramids,  under  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties.  The  kings  of  this 
age  were  descended  from  the  high-priesthood  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  their  devotion 
to  him  is  specially  shown  in  their  worship  and  monuments.  It  is  therefore  to  be 
expected  that  for  the  future  life  they  should  look  mainly  to  Ra ;  and  this  must  not 
lead  us  to  suppose  that  all  Egypt  thought  and  acted  like  the  Son  of  Ra  who  ruled 
it.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  people  in  general  shared  the  royal  worship. 
On  the  contrary,  the  deity  most  usually  found  on  private  monuments  is  the  deity  of 
the  dynastic  race,  the  Great  Mother,  Hathor  ;  while  that  most  popular  goddess  does 
not  appear  in  the  royal  ritual,  except  rarely,  as  a  secondary  manifestation  of  the 
great  Sun-god.  We  must  not  therefore  accept  the  Pyramid  Texts  as  the  Egyptian 
beliefs  of  that  age ;  they  were  a  mixture  of  all  the  preceding  strata  of  beliefs,  as 
accepted  by  the  royal  family  of  Ra-worshippers. 

Though  the  devotion  of  the  kings  was  chiefly  offered  to  Ra,  yet  Osiris  was 
steadily  becoming  more  and  more  regarded.  The  name  of  Osiris  was  being  inserted, 
sometimes  along  with  gods  of  the  Ra  cycle,  sometimes  substituted  for  them,  some- 
times in  a  charm  or  prayer  which  was  brought  entire  from  the  Osiris-worship.  The 
old  popular  faith  was  gaining  ground  from  the  Ra-worshippers,  and  the  dominance 
of  Osiris  drew  nearer. 

This  brings  us  to  the  view  of  the  "  double  "  or  ka,  the  relation  of  which  to 
human  nature  has  been  most  difficult  to  define.  There  is  little  doubt  that  there 
existed  several  different  beliefs  on  this  subject,  revealed  to  us  by  incompatible 
statements  of  various  periods.  It  may  be  well  to  look  at  a  modern  African  belief 
of  a  similar  kind,  which  having  been  stated  in  detail,  may  perhaps  be  somewhat  of 
a  guide.  In  Nigeria  "  every  ordinary  individual,  male  or  female,  is  attended  by  a 
guardian  spirit,  who  is  looked  on  as  a  protector,  is  invariably  of  the  same  household, 
and  with  whom,  when  alive,  personal  friendship  has  existed.  Every  freeman  is 
attended  by  a  guardian  spirit,  usually  the  spirit  of  his  own  immediate  father." 
(Leonard,  The  Lower  Niger,  p.  190.) 

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  read  that,  on  dying,  a  man  "went  to  his  ka''\  the  dead 
collectively  are  called  those  "  who  have  gone  to  their  ka%  "  ;  and  the  dead  "  goes  to 
his  ka,  to  the  sky."  Hereafter  the  dead  associate  with  the  ka,  and  might  have 
dominion  over  other  kas.  The  ka  is  superior  to  the  living  person.  It  was  appealed 
to  for  protection,  "call  upon  thy  ka,  like  Osiris,  that  hs  may  protect  thee  from  all 
anger  of  the  dead."  In  the  future  world  a  person  is  under  the  dominion  of  his  own 
ka.  The  ka  helps  by  interceding  with  Ra  for  the  dead,  and  introduces  the  dead  to 
Ra.     The  ka  brings  food  to  the  dead  and  eats  with  him.     The  dead  person  "  lives 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


23 


I 


18.  Thefigureof  the  KAof  King  Rameses  III.  On  his  head  isthe^a-name  "the  strong 
bull,  the  great  one  of  kings."  In  his  left  hand  is  the  emblem  of  the  royal  ka, 
a  bust  on  a  tall  sUff,  with  "io  of  the  king''  upon  it.  In  his  right  hand  is 
a  feather  fan,  with  which  he  is  fanning  the  king  upon  his  throne.  Here  the 
ka  is  dissociated  from  the  person,  and  is  assisting  him.  Limestone  temple  scene, 
Koptos.     (Univ.  Coll.,  London.) 


B  4 


24 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


with  his  ka,  who  expels  the  evil  that  is  before  him  and  removes  the  evil  that  is 
behind  him."  The  priest  was  the  servant  of  the  ka,  who  would  pass  on  the  offerings 
made  "  for  the  ka "  to  the  dead,  whom  he  supplied  and  protected.  Such  are  the 
examples  of  the  early  belief  about  the  ka  given  by  Breasted,  who  concludes  that  the 
ka  "  was  a  kind  of  superior  genius  intended  to  guide  the  fortunes  of  the  individual  " 
(p.  52).  Now  this  puzzling  localisation  by  which  the  ka  was  the  companion  of  the 
living,  and  yet  the  dead  went  to  their  kas,  is  explained  by  the  Nigerian  belief 
There,  the  gpardian  spirit  attends  on  the  living,  and  yet  is  the  spirit  of  one  who  is 
already  among  the  dead.  If  the  Egyptian  ka  was,  like  this,  an  ancestral  mani- 
festation, it  vyould  thus  guide  the  living,  yet  in  the  future  life  the  dead  would  go  to 
the  ka.  It, seems,  then,  best  to  regard  the  ka  as  an  ancestral  emanation  which  was 
associated  with  each  man  from  birth,  and  by  its  superiority  would  guide  and  help 
him  through  this  life  and  the  next. 

It  is  not  known  how  early  the  ka  was  thought  of  as  a  Double  of  the  material 
nature  ;  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  the  ka  is  represented  as  born  like  an  infant,  and 
growing  with  the  man.  This  may  have  been  the  original  notion :  the  portion  of 
ancestral  spirit  developing  with  the  individual  in  whom  it  dwelt. 

On  the  tombstones  of  the  1st  dynasty  there  is  often  placed  the  adkhu-h\rd,  the 
"brilliant  one,"  or  glorified  soul,  with  the  arms  (the 
emblem  of  the  ka)  embracing  it  from  above.  This 
would  accord  with  references  to  the  ka  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts. 

In  the  Vth  dynasty  there  are  other  references 
to  the  ka  in  the  Proverbs  of  Ptah-hotep.  Various  acts 
are  hateful  to  the  ka,  such  as  staring  at  a  man, 
losing  opportunities  of  rightful  enjoyment,  or  repeating 
expressions  of  passion.  The  son  who  resembles  his 
father  is  said  to  be  begotten  by  the  ka.  It  is  the  ka 
that  impels  to  generosity  and  kindness.  Rather  later, 
a  king  is  said  to  be  "  loved  by  his  ka."  These  state- 
ments may  well  be  compatible  with  the  guardianship 
by  the  ancestral  emanation,  or  spirit  of  the  family. 

The  tomb  sculptures  of  the  Pyramid  Age  show 
how  completely  the  dead  was  supposed  to  enjoy  all 
the  possessions  of  this  life  in  the  future  world.  Every  farm  was  to  bring  its 
produce ;  all  the  servants  and  animals  of  the  household  are  shown ;  the  games, 
the  dances,  the  hunting  and  the  fishing  were  all  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  future,  and 
were  portrayed  on  the  walls  of  the  tomb  chapel  for  the  spirit  to  take  part 
in  them. 

The  sense  of  divine  favour  in  the  future  is  stated  :  "  I  desired  that  it  might  be 
well  with  me  in  the  Great  God's  presence."  A  definite  judging  of  evil  in  the  future 
was  expected,  as  if  any  one  damaged  a  tomb  "judgment  shall  be  had  with  them 
for  it  by  the  Great  God,  the  Lord  of  Judgment,  in  the  place  where  judgment  is 
had."  The  righteous  dead  had  the  power  of  intercession  with  the  Great  God  to 
favou/  others  in  the  judgment :  "  I  will  intercede  for  their  sakes  in  the  Nether 
World." 

In  order  to  reach  the  boat  in  which  the  Sun-god  sailed  over  the  heavenly 
ocean,  the  dead  was  provided  with  a  boat,  so  as  to  sail  up  to  the  Sun-boat  and  be 
taken  in  to  the  company  of  the  gods.  A  model  boat,  or  the  sculptured  or  painted 
figure  of  one,  was  an  essential  part  of  the  funeral  furniture  of  the  Ra-worshipper. 


19. 


Thtaaikit  bird,  emblem  of  the 
spirit  of  the  deceased,  em- 
braced by  the  arras  of  the 
heavenly  ka.  (Steles  from 
Royal  Tombs.) 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


25 


In  one  instance,  there  was  a  boat  rigged  for  going  up  the  stream,  and  another  for 
going  down  the  stream. 


\ 


20.  Boat  for  the  dead  to  follow  the  Sun-god.     The  deceased  is  seated  in  a  shrine ;  before  him  is  a  table 
with  a  vase  and  a  servant  offering.     (Tomb  of  Hori,  phot.  Insinger.) 

After  this  age  of  great   faith   and   great  works,  a  wave  of  pessimism  and 
agnosticism  spread  in  the  dechne  of  that  civilisation.     They  sang  of  the  future  Hfe  : 

"  None  cotneth  from  thence 
That  he  may  say  how  they  fare, 
That  he  may  tell  of  their  fortunes. 
That  he  may  content  our  heart, 
Until  we  also  depart. 
To  the  place  whither  they  have  gone. 


Lo  !  no  man  taketh  his  goods  with  him. 

Yea,  none  returneth  again  that  is  gone  thither." — {Br.  183.) 

At  the  same  time  the  disorder  and  misery  of  life  was  such  that  even  death  was 
welcomed : 

"  Death  is  before  me  to-day. 

Like  the  recovery  of  a  sick  man. 

Like  going  forth  into  a  garden  after  sickness. 

Death  is  before  me  to-day, 

Like  the  odour  of  lotus-flowers. 

Like  sitting  on  the  shore  of  intoxication. 

Death  is  before  me  to-day, 

As  a  man  longs  to  see  his  house 

When  he  has  spent  years  in  captivity." — {Br.  195.) 

These  and  many  other  lamentations  over  the  corruption  of  the  world,  show 
the  dissatisfaction  which  led  men  to  reflect  on  the  need  of  a  future  judgment  to 
recompense  the  evils  which  they  saw.  It  was  amid  such  distresses  that  the  belief 
in  the  Judgment  Seat  of  Osiris  grew  into  definite  form.     In  that  Judgment,  Anubis, 


26 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


the  guardian  of  the  dead,  brought  the  deceased  into  the  Judgment  Hall.  There  his 
heart  was  weighed  in  the  balance  against  Truth;  and,  if  judged  correct,  he  was 
then  led  by  Horus  into  the  presence  of  Osiris;  if  faulty,  there  stood  A  mam,  the 
devouring  crocodile-hippopotamus  to  consume  him.  It  should  be  observed  here 
that  Osiris  does  not  judge  the  dead ;  the  judgment  is  entirely  abstract,  mechanical, 
independent  of  judicial  choice.  The  fact  of  a  man  being  righteous  or  unrighteous 
is  not  a  subject  of  consideration,  but  is  a  definite  fact  not  admitting  of  doubt. 
When  once  ascertained  by  agents  of  Osiris,  then  the  dead  is  either  admitted  to  the 
kingdom  of  Osiris  or  annihilated.  There  is  no  parallel  here  to  the  Christian  view 
of  the  Last  Judgment. 


' 

W--:',\\          .^^hRI 

ir "I'l'-;:  -niiS 

-■       ■•■     ■  S'^ 

:<■■:     '         >-::-~ 

•      ,  -■■'V 

21.  Occupations  in  the  kingdom  of  Osiris.     (Navillb,  Papyrus  de  Kamara.) 

Top. — Pulling  up  flax  for  making  clothing. 

Queen  Ka-MA-ra  on  her  throne  sailing  in  a  ship  at  will. 
The  ploughman  tilling  the  ground. 

Base, — The  reaper  cutting  corn,  with  a  sack  to  carry  the  ears  slung  from  his  head. 


Egyptian    Bplicfx  !n  n   Fntiirr   Life. 


27 


"^•3  £ 


■8    Z 

O 


■lBilii^'ll@gi-yJil' 


nit^-^j^Eft^ 


•^Mi^Mffi 


o 
H 


iMiMM* 


«-■* 

^::^ 


l^l^pga: 


1} 


S^imWfM-i 


P 


!MM!®W;'::HhiJ<;^ 


^^hojfflfi^^ 


':§"^w;;M\4;9t*^^i 


l?<J<^g-^JM( 


"   "  s: 
.£  -s   2 


X  -a 


"^ 


■8 


28 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


The  nature  of  the  future  life  in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris  is  continually  depicted 
in  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  Earlier  than  that  is  a  song  about  those  who  are  yonder 
in  heaven  with  Ra : 

"  He  who  is  yonder 
Shall  seize  the  wicked  as  a  living  god, 
Inflicdng  punishment  of  evil  on  the  doer  of  it. 
He  who  is  yonder 
Shall  stand  in  the  celestial  barque 

Causing  the  liest  offerings  there  to  be  given  to  the  temples. 
He  who  is  yonder 

Shall  be  a  wise  man  who  has  not  been  repelled 
Praying  to  Ra  when  he  speaks." — {Br.  197.) 

In  comparison  with  this  the  Osirian  heaven  was  very  homely.  The  tlcad 
was  promised  that  he  should  eat  at  his  desire,  remember  what  he  had  forgotten, 
have  sandals  for  his  feet,  and  repel  the  burglar  and  the  early  thief.  He  should 
have  a  house  and  pool  and  orchard,  and  all  his  household  and  children,  brothers, 
father,  mother,  wives,  concubines,  slaves,  and  all  his  establishment,  .  .  .  "everything 
belonging  to  a  man."  To  this  end,  400  figures  of  serfs  to  cultivate  the  land  were 
supplied  in  the  tomb,  with  elaborate  instructions  inscribed  on  each  as  to  their  duties. 

In  all  this  there  is  no  confession  of  wrong-doing,  no  plea  for  mercy.  The 
Egyptian  boasts  that  he  had  done  nothing  wrong,  he  asserts  his  faultlessness  from 
every  sin  he  can  recount,  in  order  to  prove  that  he  is  worthy.  This  purgation  by 
assertion  is  a  thoroughly  Egyptian  trait  in  modern  times.  He  thus  addresses  the 
assembled  gods : — "  Behold,  I  come  to  you  without  sin,  without  evil,  without  wrong, 
I  live  on  righteousness,  I  feed  on  the  righteousness  of  my  heart,  I  have  done  that 
which  men  say,  and  that  wherewith  the  gods  are  content." 

So  much  for  the  official  and  priestly  view  of  the  future.  But  there  lingered 
older  beliefs  in  the  popular  heart.  The  food  and  drink  was  still  placed  in  the 
grave,  as  it  is  even  to  this  day.  At  the  earlier  part  of  the  Osirian  revival  the  dread 
of  the  dead  coming  out  of  the  graves  and  haunting  the  villages,  led  to  model 
houses  being  placed  by  the  side  of  the  graves  for  the  soul  to  find  shelter  in.  These 
pottery  models  of  the  dwellinghouse  show  the  common  buildings  of  the  peasantry, 
with  their  lower  and  upper  floors,  their  fenced  roofs,  air-shafts,  furniture,  food,  and 
the  domestic  drudge  who  ground  the  corn.  The  soul,  therefore,  was  thought  of  as 
wandering  about  from  the  grave,  and  needing  shelter  and  a  home. 


23.  The  soul  entering  the  boat  of  the  sun,  in  which  the  nine  gods  are  seated.     (Leps.,  Todl.,  LV.) 


The  comforting  doctrine  of  accompanying  the  gods  in  the  Boat  of  Ra,  or  living 
a  social  life  of  happiness  in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris,  was  overlaid  by  a  crowd  of 
invented  horrors.  Even  the  god  Ra  had  to  pass  through  a  series  of  hours  of 
darkness,  regarded  as  dismal  caverns,  where  evil  spirits  tried  to  waylay  and  overcome 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 


29 


the  dead.  Long  spells  and  directions  were  therefore  needed  to  enable  such  dangers 
to  be  repelled.  The  later  religious  guide-books  to  the  Underworld  consist  mainly 
of  details  of  such  future  perils,  and  the  means  of  resisting  them.  Even  the  walls  of 
the  tomb,  from  the  XVIIIth  to  the  XXVIth  dynasty,  1500-500  B.C.,  were  sculptured 
with  scenes,  and  directions  for  the  terrible  future,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  the  old 
subjects  of  domestic  life.     It  was  no  longer  the  enjoyment  of  a  repetition  of  the 


24.  The  singer  of  Amen,  DiRPU,  being  led  by  the  Ijeneficent  Bastet  past  the  horrors  of  the  infernal 
animals,  and  a  bitch-headed  spirit  armed  with  knives  and  serpents.     (Phot.  Brugsch.) 


present  life  that  was  presented,  but  the  terrors  of  perils- by  demons.  The  so-called 
"  Book  of  the  Dead  "  is  a  conglomeration  of  all  the  charms  which  were  deemed  to  be 
most  needful.  No  two  copies  of  it  are  alike  ;  the  scribe  merely  put  together  a  more 
or  less  full  series  of  those  formulae  which  attracted  him.  Most  of  it  is  undoubtedly 
very  early,  containing  allusions  to  prehistoric  practices,  but  it  is  so  overlaid  by 
successive  editings,  variants,  targums,  and  corruptions,  that  we  cannot  hope  for  a 
critical  edition  disentangling  the  various  periods  represented. 

Such  was  the  outlook  on  the  future  life,  a  complex  of  many  incompatible  beliefs, 
among  which  each  person  chose  and  combined  what  suited  him,  with  a  strong 
influence  of  fashion  and  priestly  bias  for  one  view  or  another  at  different  times. 
Yet  below  all  these  beliefs  lay  the  whole-hearted  confidence  in  personal  immortality 
which  seems  to  have  been  so  firmly  held  in  almost  all  ages  of  Egyptian  history. 

All  that  we  have  noticed  continued  gradually  to  fossilise  and  become  less 
personally  real,  until  a  new  wave  of  influence  spread  over  the  world.  The  fresh 
movement  was  that  of  individualism,  personal  responsibility,  anfl  personal  religion. 


30  Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life. 

No  longer  was  religion  principally  concerned  with  a  public  worship,  it  became  a 
more  personal  devotion.  With  this  went  an  ethical  growth  and  a  new  value 
attached  to  the  individual  life.  The  earliest  sign  of  this  movement  is  in  Hesiod, 
about  850  B.C.,  who  was  contemptuously  called  the  poet  of  helots,  from  his 
honouring  agriculture,  which  was  held  to  be  degrading  to  freemen.  The  preaching 
of  simplicity  in  life,  with  pure  and  practical  ethics,  was  the  dawn  of  a  new  age. 
A  century  later,  about  727  B.C.,  Piankhy  the  Ethiopian  reconquered  Egypt.  He 
protested  to  his  enemies  :  "  If  a  moment  passes  without  submitting  to  me,  behold  ye 
are  reckoned  as  conquered,  and  that  is  painful  to  the  king.  Behold  ye,  there  are 
two  ways  before  you,  choose  ye  as  ye  will ;  open  to  me,  and  ye  live  ;  clo.se,  and  ye 
die.  His  Majesty  loveth  that  Memphis  be  safe  and  sound,  and  that  even  the 
children  weep  not."  When  he  entered  a  city  after  a  siege  he  went  personally  to  see 
about  the  horses,  and  when  he  found  that  they  had  been  neglected  and  starved  he 
swore,  "  By  my  life,  so  may  Ra  love  me,  I  loathe  the  men  who  have  starved  my 
horses  more  than  any  abomination  that  the  rebel  has  done  altogether." 

Isaiah  shows  the  same  growth  of  ethical  feeling,  and  disregard  of  mere  collective 
formalism.     "  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations,  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me 

...  it  is  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meeting Wash  you,  make  you  clean, 

put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  "(i,  13-16).  Rather  later,  Ezekiel,  in  594  B.C., 
proclaims  entirely  individual  responsibility  ;  he  repudiates  the  sins  of  the  fathers 
falling  on  the  children  ;  "  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  But  if  a  man  be  just 
....  he  shall  surely  live"  (xviii, 4-9).  A  century  later  Buddha  preached  his  great 
system  of  individual  responsibility  and  wide  love  for  man  resulting  in  ethical 
conduct.  Even  as  far  as  China  the  same  individualism  rose  up,  shown  in  340  B.C., 
when  common  field  cultivation  was  abandoned,  and  private  ownership  began. 

In  Egypt,  this  new  spirit  in  the  world  was  largely  influenced  by  the  flow  of 
Jewish,  Persian,  and  Indian  ideas,  from  the  sixth  century  B.C.  onward.  The  main 
documents  that  we  have  for  this  age  are  the  Hermetic  writings,  which  are  dated  by 
the  political  allusions  in  them,  and  were  composed  from  5CXD  to  200  B.C.  The  earliest 
of  these  works,  The  Virgin  of  the  Kosnios,  probably  about  510  B.C.,  describes  the 
formation  of  souls  from  the  Breath  of  God  and  Conscious  Fire,  blended  with 
unconscious  matter.  These  souls  rebelled,  and  God  then  embodied  them  as  men. 
The  imprisoned  souls  lament,  and  are  answered  by  God  that  if  they  are  sinless  they 
shall  dwell  in  the  fields  of  heaven  ;  that  if  blameable  then  they  shall  be  on  earth  ; 
if  they  improve  they  shall  regain  Heaven ;  but  if  they  sin  worse  they  shall  become 
animals.  This  metempsychosis  is  probably  shown  in  some  Egyptian  judgment 
scenes,  where  a  pig  is  being  driven  away  as  the  vehicle  of  a  condemned  soul.  The 
more  righteous  souls  shall  be  kings,  philosophers,  founders  of  states,  law-givers,  etc. ; 
the  lower  souls  shall  be  eagles,  lions,  dragons,  and  dolphins.  The  gods  are  stated 
to  dwell  in  the  Aether  with  the  sun  and  stars ;  in  the  air  are  souls  and  the  moon  ; 
on  earth  are  men  and  living  things. 

A  slightly  later  work.  The  Discourse  of  Isis  to  Horus,  states  that  the  souls  of 
men  and  animals  are  all  alike;  metempsychosis  between  men  and  animals  is 
assumed ;  the  soul  is  individual,  the  work  of  God's  hands  and  mind,  its  congress 
with  the  body  is  a  concord  wrought  by  God's  necessity  ;  at  death  it  returns  to  its 
proper  region,  between  the  moon  and  the  earth. 

Rather  later,  in  The  Definitions  of  Askkpios,  the  soul's  rational  part — Logos — is 
above  the  rule  of  daimons  ;  and  if  a  ray  of  God  shines  through  the  sun  into  it,  the 
daimons  do  not  act  upon  it.  Here,  then,  the  Logos  is  something  added  to  the  .soul 
and  a  further  change  may  take  place  in  the  Logos. 


I 


Egyptian  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life.  3 1 

By  about  340  B.C.  we  find  in  The  Perfect  Discourse  a  more  complex  psychology. 
Animals  have  bodies  and  souls,  and  are  filled  with  spirit.  In  man  sense  and  reason 
are  added,  as  a  fifth  part.  In  part  man  is  deathless,  in  part  subject  to  death. 
[When  the  soul  leaves  the  body  then  the  judgment  and  the  weighing  of  merit  pass 
^into  its  highest  daimon's  power  ;  apparently  thus  the  judgment  was  transferred  to 
the  ka.  If  the  soul  is  pious  it  is  allowed  to  rest;  if  soiled  with  evil,  it  is  driven  out 
into  the  depths,  to  vortices  of  Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  between  heaven  and  earth. 

In  the  discourse  called  The  Font,  probably  about  300  B.C.,  the  nature  of  man  is 
stated  as  excelling  by  reason  of  the  Logos.  Logos  indeed  among  all  men  God  has 
distributed.  They  who  do  not  understand  possess  Logos  only,  and  not  mind.  Thus 
Logos  was  animal  reason,  and  Mind  was  a  spiritual  gift,  which  was  acquired  by 
spiritual  immersion  in  the  Font  of  Mind. 

Rather  later — but  .yet  long  before  the  Christian  era — is  The  Secret  Discourse, 
in  which  re-birth  is  stated  to  confer  immortality ;  the  natural  body  must  be 
dissolved :  the  spiritual  birth  can  never  die.  Here  we  cannot  avoid  seeing  the 
Indian  influence  in  the  simile  of  conversion  as  re-birth.  In  the  latest  of  this  series, 
The  Shepherd  of  Men,  it  is  said  that  senseless  men  pass  into  darkness,  their  minds 
naturally  return  to  primitive  chaos.  In  the  good,  the  Shepherd  Mind  is  present, 
giving  Gnosis  and  Religion,  and  enabling  them  to  turn  away  from  the  world  before 
death,  and  therefore  never  to  die  like  others  in  parting  from  the  world.  The  end 
of  those  who  have  gained  Gnosis  is  to  be  one  with  God. 

The  Egyptian,  therefore,  had,  by  the  mixture  of  Eastern  philosophy,  gained  a 
stand-point  approaching  that  of  Christian  times ;  indeed,  it  was  the  religious  terms 
and  conceptions  of  the  Alexandrian  School 
which  formed  the  soil  in  which  Christianity 
was  planted. 

We  may  sum  up  the  pre-Christian  idea  of 
man  as  being  an  animal  soul,  in  which  Divine 
reason  was  implanted  as  a  human  distinction. 
That  soul  might  yet  go  astray,  and  a  special 
divine  influence,  symbolised  by  a  ray  of  light,  or 
immersion  in  the  Font  of  Mind,  or  re-birth,  was 
needed  to  save  it  from  the  evil  influence  of 
daimons.    The  evil  suff^ered  distress  in  the  future,     ^S-  The  ha,  or  soul,  holding  xht  onkh, 

.,,,,.  ...  reluming  to  the  mummy  to  impart 

probably  leadmg  up  to  annihilation  ;    the  good  life  to  it.    (Leps.,  7W/.,  XXXIII.) 

were  given  a  life  of  blessed  rest.     This  is  not  far 

in  advance  of  the  Egyptian  position  some  three  or  four  thousand  years  earlier. 
It  is  the  old  Egyptian  framework  filled  in  with  detail  from  Indian  and  other  sources. 
Whether  we  look  to  the  earlier  or  to  the  later  time  we  see  how  far  more  modern 
were  the  Egyptian  beliefs,  than  were  the  contemporary  Hebrew  ideas  about  a  future 
life.     We  are  the  heirs  of  Egypt  rather  than  of  Hebraism  in  our  Christian  ideas. 

Prof.  W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 

Notes  for  Advanced  Students. 

The  stages  of  prehistoric  civilisation  can  be  linked  with  the  stages  of  religious  beliefs,  which  thus  become 
sorted  and  dated. 

The  texts  naming  reed  floats  must  precede  the  common  use  of  boats. 

The  Pyramid  Texts  are  the  formulae  of  the  royal  Ra-worshippers,  and  did  not  necessarily  represent  the 
general  beliefs. 

The  ka  is  explained  by  African  beliefs  as  an  ancestral  emanation. 


(       32      ) 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  Z£T. 

In  the  version  of  Manetho's  chronology  that  has  beea  transmitted  through 
Africanus,  there  is,  at  the  close  of  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty,  an  entry  that  has  raised  a 
crop  of  conjectures.  In  place  of  any  recognisable  name  of  a  king  there  is  Zrjr  ert) 
\a', — Zet,  31  years. 

This  Zet  is  entirely  unknown  on  the  monuments,  there  is  not  a  chip  of  stone 
or  a  flake  of  papyrus,  a  scarab  or  an  amulet,  to  show  his  existence.  He  has  been 
thought  to  be  the  Sethon,  priest  of  Ptah  named  by  Herodotos  (II,  141),  who  places 
him  after  Shabaka,  and  therefore  too  late ; — or  possibly  connected  with  the  blind 
king  Anysis  ; — or  a  contemporary  of  Bakneranf,  a  vague  enough  conjecture ; — or  to 
be  the  Saite  Tnephachthos  or  Tafnekht ; — or  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  word  "  Saite  " ; 
— or  to  be  King  Kashta,  the  Ethiopian.  I  confess  to  venturing  the  suggestion  that 
this  was  a  date  from  some  earlier  starting  point,  giving  a  summation  of  years. 
With  some  writers,  of  course,  Manetho  is  the  whipping-boy,  who  must  always  be 
flogged  whenever  anything  is  not  understood. 

We  must  alwa}'s  remember  that  we  need  to  consider  Manetho  as  a  Greek 
manuscript,  with  the  usual  character  and  methods  of  any  other  papyrus  of  the 
Ptolemaic  time.  On  reaching  the  period  of  disruption,  when  a  dozen  petty  princes 
were  dividing  the  land,  it  was  hard  to  say  who  was  to  be  mentioned  as  continuing 
the  XXIIIrd  dynasty.  For  thirty-one  years  no  single  ruler  seemed  to  be  pre- 
dominant, further  search  was  needed  to  settle  who  should  be  entered  as  the  king  of 
Egypt.  So  the  honest  "  beloved  of  Thoth "  put  down  ZrjrelTai  "  A  question 
(remain.s)  about  thirty-one  years,"  or  "  Query  "  ;  or  perhaps  some  other  derivative 
of  Zr/T6<a,  "  I  search  after."  A  natural  MS.  abbreviation  of  this  note  of  enquiry, 
like  our  "Qu.,"  was  Ztjt.  Hence  the  mysterious  entry.  It  proves  that  we  must 
include  this  thirty-one  years  in  the  history,  although  no  one  king  can  be  assigned  ; 
and  in  the  summary  of  the  Recueil  in  this  number  will  be  seen  how  it  falls  into 
its  necessary  place  in  the  dynastic  history. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


26.  Ship  with  cabins  and  steersman.     (Hierakonpolh,  LXXVI,  LXXVIl.) 
37.  Ship  with  three  steering  oars.    (A'ai^oa'a,  LXVII,  14.)     28.  Ship  with  sail.    (Capart, /V/V«.  ^r/.,  fig.  83.) 


(     33     ) 

FOR  RECONSIDERATION. 

Onkh-em-mdot. 

We  purpose  under  this  heading  to  take  up  in  each  number  some  of  the  various 
matters  which  need  clearing  up,  by  reference  to  facts  which  are  little  known,  or 
disregarded. 

Glass-Blowing. 

In  the  days  before  the  history  of  Egyptian  manufactures  was  known,  it  was 
a  very  natural  supposition  on  the  part  of  Gardner  Wilkinson  that  certain  scenes 
represented  men  blowing  glass  bulbs  on  the  end  of  rods  (^Manners  atid  Customs, 
ed.  1878,  Fig.  380).  The  upper  one  of  the  figures  which  he  gives  was  evidently 
copied  from  the  tomb  of  Baqta,  No.  15,  at  Beni  Hasan  {Beni  Hasan,  II,  VII), 
where  it  is  by  the  side  of  the  jewellers  weighing  with  a  balance.  Unfortunately, 
this  description  of  glass-blowing  continues  to  be  frequently  brought  up  in  evidence 
for  the  use  of  glass.  Now,  though  thousands  of  pieces  of  glass  vessels  are  known, 
especially  about  1500-1400  B.C.,  yet  there  is  not  a  single  piece  of  blown  glass 
dateable  before  Roman  times.  All  of  the  earlier  glass  working  was  in  a  stiff  pasty 
condition,  and  not  fluid  enough  to  be  blown.  The  glass  vases  were  made  by 
building  up  on  a  core,  which  was  afterwards  scraped  out.  It  is  incredible  that  glass 
was  blown  when  all  the  mass  of  specimens  which  we  have,  show  that  a  different 
process  at  a  lower  temperature  was  universally  used.  The  real  meaning  of  these 
scenes  is  that  the  men  are  blowing  up  the  small  charcoal  fires  used  by  the  jewellers; 
and,  as  the  reed  blowpipes  would  soon  be  burnt  at  the  end,  a  lump  of  mud  was  put 
on  as  a  nozzle  to  the  pipe.  Where  two  men  are  shown  {Manners  and  Customs, 
Fig.  380)  blowing  into  what  seems  like  a  vase  upside  down,  it  is  certain  that  they 
could  not  be  blowing  a  glass  vase  of  that  form  ;  if  blown  it  would  be  spherical,  and 
such  a  form  could  only  be  made  by  rolling  the  blown  bubble.  What  they  are 
really  doing  is  blowing  up  a  small  charcoal  furnace  inside  a  pot,  probably  to  melt 
a  crucible  full  of  metal  in  it. 

Paintings  of  Prehistoric  Towns. 

The  frequent  figures  of  structures  upon  the  later  prehistoric  pottery  were 
recognised  at  first  as  being  clearly  intended  for  ships,  with  a  large  number  of  oars, 
two  cabins,  and  an  ensign. 

Another  interpretation  has  arisen,  supposing  these  figures  to  be  intended  for 
fortified  towns.  Even  on  any  ordinary  specimen,  the  absence  of  any  base  line 
below  the  oars  which  could  be  taken  for  the  outline  of  a  town  mound,  would  be 
difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  land  interpretation. 

When,  however,  we  look  at  the  critical  examples,  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is 
impossible  to  interpret  them  as  views  of  towns  : — 

(i)  The  two  ends  are  always  different;  for  a  town  the  two  sides  should  be 
alike,  in  a  boat  the  stem  and  stern  differ. 

(2)  In  the  Hierakonpolis  paintings  there  are  no  oars,  except  the  big  steering 
oar  which  is  held  by  the  steersman  at  the  stern.  A  paddle  such  as  this  cannot 
possibly  be  figured  as  projecting  from  a  town  (see  Fig.  26).  On  other  examples 
there  are  three  steering  oars  (Fig.  27). 

(3)  At  the  stem  dangles  the  tying-up  rope  (Figs.  26,  27),  still  used  universally 
in  Egypt  now.    This  cannot  belong  to  a  town. 

C 


34 


For  Reconsideration. 


(4)  The  form  of  one  of  the  Hierakonpolis  boats  is  exactly  that  of  another 
painting  (Fig.  28)  on  a  pot,  where  a  big  square-sail  marks  it  inevitably  as  a  boat. 

(5)  A  fresh  specimen  is  here  published,  which  I  bought  in  Egypt  lately  (Fig.  29). 
On  this  is  a  structure  from  which  four  men  are  poling ;  with  the  shoulder  against 
the  pole  end,  and  the  weight  of  the  body  resting  upon  it,  exactly  as  Nile  boatmen 
pole  a  boat  along  at  present  To  suppose  them  fighting  from  a  town  in  that  attitude 
would  be  absurd  ;  the  action  is  precisely  that  of  boatmen.  This  is  a  unique 
example  of  a  great  state  boat  with  a  row  of  passenger  cabins  on  it ;  these  are  raised 
to  a  higher  level,  so  as  to  be  clear  of  the  men  working  the  boat.  This  specimen  is 
now  at  University  College,  London. 


29.   Prehistoric  vase  painted  wiih  a  scene  or  a  large  bnil  wuikcti  along  by  sailors  poling.     Above  them 
is  a  row  of  cabins  with  figures  of  women  in  them.     (University  College,  London.) 

In  the  ordinary  figures  of  boats,  it  may  be  explained  that  they  have  two  cabins, 
sometimes  with  small  cabins  or  animal  pens  attached.  On  these  cabins  are  bent 
withies  standing  up,  to  hold  in  poles,  oars,  and  other  lumber,  put  out  of  the  way  on 
the  tops  of  the  cabins.  Sometimes,  as  in  Fig.  26,  a  shelter  was  put  on  the  top  ol 
a  cabin,  with  a  branch  of  a  tree  over  it  to  shade  it  from  the  heat.  In  the  bows 
there  is  a  seat  for  the  look-out  man,  with  a  branch  put  over  it  to  shade  him  from  the 
glare.  Whether  these  branches  were  young  trees  in  pots,  or  cut  branches,  is  not 
certain.  If  cut  branches— as  they  seem  to  be— that  would  accord  with  the  much 
greater  frequency  of  timber  in  Egypt  formerly,  as  shown  by  the  common  use  of 
great  quantities  of  wood  in  the  Royal  Tombs  and  elsewhere. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(     35     ) 


'        PERIODICALS. 

— ♦ — 

Recueil  de  Tr avail x  relatifs  a  la  Philologie  et  a  i' A rcheologie 
egyptiennes  et  assyriennes,  Vol.  XXXV,  191 3. 


paper  collecting  and  discussing  all  the  geographical  material  about  the  noma 
between  Assiut  and  Ekhmim.  The  ceaseless  destruction  of  the  ancient  sites  for 
sebakh  brought  to  light  a  large  quantity  of  Greek  and  Coptic  papyri  about  a  dozen 
years  ago,  at  a  modern  town  known  as  Kum  Ashqouh  (or  Ischgaou) ;  Mr.  Quibell 
inspected  the  place  for  the  Government,  and  obtained  also  carved  woodwork  and 
other  early  Coptic  remains.  These  discoveries  fairly  settled  the  main  question  of 
the  locality  of  Aphroditopolis,  as  that  city  is  usually  named,  in  the  documents  found 
on  the  site. 

The  old  nome  standard  is  the  serpent,  with  an  ostrich  plume  upon  its  back 

^~^rl ,  the  distinctive  mark  of  a  sacred  animal  (see  Royal  Tombs,  I,  xxix,  xx.x ; 

[  1 1  rr  \ 

Tarkhan,  I,  ii).  This  standard  is  vocalized,  both  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  and  the 
XlXth  dynasty,  as  Udzet,  showing  it  to  be  the  serpent-emblem  of  the  great  goddess 
of  Buto.  Variants  in  late  times  show  two  serpents,  perhaps  due  to  a  confusion 
with  the  two  gods  named  for  the  eastern  side  of  the  nome  :  see  below.  The  only 
period  of  historical  importance  for  this  place  was  when  it  formed  the  northern 
frontier  of  the  Theban  Kingdom  of  the  Xlth  dynasty,  under  Uah-onkh  Antef 
From  the  Vlth  dynasty  to  Roman  times  forty-eight  instances  of  the  name  are 
cited  for  this  sacred  name  of  the  city. 

The  profane  name  Thebti,  or  the  two  sandals,  is  derived  by  tradition  from  the 
sandals  made  by  Horus  from  the  skin  of  Set,  after  his  defeat  near  this  place.  Of 
this  name  ten  instances  are  cited.  1  he  old  identification  of  it  with  Idfu,  started  by 
D'Anville,  was  generally  accepted  until  the  papyri  showed  the  site  to  be  at 
Ashqouh. 

The  nome  was  divided  into  two  parts,  western  and  eastern.     The  latter  was 

known  as  Neterui     J  J  ,  because  of  the  triumph  of  Horus  over  Set  in  this  district, 

near  Qau  el-Kebyr.  On  the  west  bank  was  a  place  referring  again  to  this 
traditional  history,  Ha-sehetept,  "  the  place  of  causing  peace  "  ;  and  the  high-priest 
was  called  Sehetep  neterui,  "  pacifier  of  the  two  gods."  It  seems  probable  that  this 
place  is  the  Greek  Hisopis,  which  by  the  itinerary  must  have  been  near  El-Maraghat. 
On  the  eastern  side  the  main  place  was  Antaeopolis,  known  as  "  the  high-place," 
Duqa,  Qay,  or  Taqayt.     A  dozen  minor  places  are  also  named  in  the  nome. 

The  divinities  were  Hathor,  the  Aphrodite  of  the  Greek  city  name,  Horus  with 
Set,  Maa-hes  son  of  Bastet,  Hor-se-ast,  Mut,  Osiris  and  Amen, 

The  western  side  of  the  nome  was  of  no  importance  in  Roman  times,  though 
Antaeopolis  retained  some  attention  on  the  eastern  bank.  The  papyri  are  mostly 
of  the  Coptic  and  early  Arabic  period.     The  capital  was  the  Coptic  Jekow,  Arabic 

C  2 


36  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

Ashqouh.  Antaeopolis  became  Tkdou,  now  Qau-kharab,  or  el-Kebyr.  Apollono- 
polis  is  in  the  Coptic  lists  Sbeht.the  modern  Kum  Asfeht.  A  very  full  series  of  all 
the  mediaeval  sources  for  the  place-names  is  given,  but  does  not  materially  add  to 
the  main  conclusions. 

Das  Kolophon  des  liturgischen  Papyrus.—  "^.  Spiegelberg.  This  papyrus  is  of 
much  palaeographic  importance  by  reason  of  its  exact  date,  March,  311  B.C.  It 
begins  with  a  long  list  of  prophets,  in  office  at  Thebes  and  Diospolis  Parva,  which 
fills  more  than  half  of  it ;  the  remainder  is  not  of  importance. 

Eine  Sclienkungsurkunde  aus  der  zeit  Scheschonks  //I.—W.  SPIEGELBERG. 
Two  donation  steles  of  Sheshenq  III  are  here  published,  one  in  the  Musde  Guimet 
in  tjpe,  and  one  in  Berlin,  both  in  type  and  photograph.  They  are  dated  in  the 
1 8th  and  28th  years  respectively.  The  Guimet  stele  names  a  prince  and  general 
Tekilat,  who  is  not  otherwise  known,  and  his  mother  Zed-bast-aus-onkh,  a  concubine. 
The  main  interest  of  each  stele  is  in  their  naming  a  "  royal  son  of  Rameses,"  without 
any  names.  There  are  eight  of  these  descendants  known  now,  and  their  position 
is  enigmatical.  Why  the  XXIInd  dynasty  kings  should  have  tolerated  and  put 
forward  men  who  might  claim  to  be  political  rivals  is  still  unexplained.  It  is 
possible  that  the  clan  of  royal  descent  formed  a  fixed  aristocracy  of  the  period, 
sufficiently  united  and  powerful  to  command  respect,  but  so  numerous  that  their 
jealousies  rendered  them  powerless  politically.  The  two  hundred  children  which 
may  be  ascribed  to  Rameses  II  would,  in  a  stationary  number  of  population,  have 
permeated  the  ancestry  of  loo.ocx)  or  2CXD,ooo  by  the  time  of  the  XXIInd  dynasty  ; 
so,  thus,  the  whole  aristocracy  of  Egypt  were  probably  entitled  "royal  sons  of 
Rameses." 

No/e  siir  des  pierres  antiques  du  Caire. — G.  DakesSY.  The  useful  work  of 
registering  fixed  monuments  is  here  continued.  The  pillage  of  stone  from  the 
temples  of  Memphis,  Heliopolis,  and  other  places,  for  the  building  of  Cairo,  has 
scattered  pieces  of  all  ages  through  the  public  and  private  structures  of  Arab  date. 
Here  are  described : — 

1.  Block  of  granite  with  part  of  a  list  of  temple  statues,  naming  material  and 
height.     Saite. 

2.  Block  of  granite,  part  of  a  great  table  of  offerings  of  Rameses  II. 

3.  Block  of  granite  of  Aahmes-sa-neit. 

4.  Piece  of  six-lobed  lotus  column  of  sandstone,  of  Amenhetep  III,  surcharged 
by  Merneptah  and  Setnekht. 

5.  (Photograph.)  Marble  shrine  of  Isis  of  Greek  period.  The  goddess  is  on 
a  throne  of  winged  lions,  a  priest  offering  before  her,  another  standing  behind 
holding  a  ram-headed  wand.  The  priest  and  altar  have  a  likeness  to  the  subject 
on  Persian  gems,  and  the  architectural  style  might  well  be  late  Ptolemaic. 
M.  Daressy  would  however  place  it  in  the  second  or  third  century  of  our  era. 

Monuments    Egyptiens    du    Mus^e    Calvet    it    Avignon. — A.    MORET.      This 
Catalogue  is  continued  from  the  previous  year. 
The  monuments  are  as  follows  : — 

XXII.  Stele  with  seated  figure  of  Mentu  holding  falchion  and  shield  ;  dedicated 
by  Ptahmes  and  his  family:  XlXth  dynasty. 

XXIII.  Stele  dedicated  to  the  goose  of  Amen. 


k 


Recueil  de  Travaux.  37 

XXIV.  Stele  dedicated  to  Osiris,  by  a  woman  Petes. 

XXV.  Stele  to  Osiris  by  an  hereditary  prince  and  vizier. 

XXVI.  Stele  to  Osiris  by  Peduast. 

XXVII.  Stele  to  Hor-em-aai<huti,  by  Hor-khred-meh. 

XXVIII.  Stel^to  Hor-em-aakhuti,  by  Zed-khonsu-au-onkh. 

XXIX.  Stele  to  Osiris  by  a  singer  of  Amen. 

XXX.  Stele  of  Horus  on  the  crocodiles,  with  long  inscription,  in  which 
occur  weird  names  such  as  are  found  in  the  late  magical  documents — Shardshek, 
Berker,  Arourouari. 

XXXI.  Fragment  of  basalt  statue,  probably  Xllth  dynasty. 

XXXII.  A  clay  tablet,  6  x  3"3  inches,  with  four  columns  of  finely  drawn 
hieroglyphs,  the  columns  reading  retrograde,  like  the  great  inscription  of  Rekhmara. 
The  inscription  is  the  CLiB  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  for  the  Vizier  User, 
son  of  the  Vizier  Odytu.  The  parallel  texts  are  given,  comparing  this  with  five 
other  versions,  which  are  all  later.  User  lived  early  in  the  reign  of  Thothmes  III, 
and  was  not  only  son  of  Odytu,  but  uncle  of  the  Vizier  Rekhmara.  His  complete 
name  was  Amenuser.     References  are  given  to  other  publications. 

XXXIII.  Base  of  a  statue  of  Amenhetep  III,  naming  his  j^a?-feast. 

XXXIV.  Piece  of  seated  figure  of  Nekht,  the  chief  overseer  of  the  prophets. 

XXXV.  Statue  of  Huy. 

XXXVI.  Statue  of  Hora,  son  of  Bakamenra. 

XXXVII.  Statue,  name  lost. 
XXXIX.  Statue  of  Shem  (?),  of  Koptos. 
XL.  Piece  of  granite  obelisk  of  Rameses  11. 
XLI.  Piece  of  statue  of  Seker. 

XLII.  Votive  pyramid  of  a  scribe  of  the  temple  of  Anher,  Nesmin  son  of 
Mertheru,  about  XXIIIrd  dynasty  ;  with  a  long  inscription  giving  five  generations. 
XLIII.  Table  of  offerings  of  Hor-se-ast,  prophet  of  Anher. 
XLIV,  XLV.  Small  tables  of  offerings  uninscribed. 

Notes  de  Grammaire. —  P.  Lacau.  A  continuation  of  comments  on  grammatical 
points  drawn  from  the  writer's  wide  experience  and  reading,  but  seldom  touching 
matters  of  general  interest.  On  the  origin  of  number  signs  it  may  be  noted  that 
all  unit  signs  were  originally  written  as  horizontal  strokes,  not  vertical ;  this  has 
led  to  some  false  readings  when  the  custom  was  forgotten.  The  names  of  the 
various  signs  for  each  place  of  figures  from  10  to  10,000,000  are  all  shown  to  be 
indicated  by  phonetic  signs  homophonous  with  the  name  of  the  number.  In  the 
higher  values  the  connection  is  plain  ;  for  the  cord  the  name  set  is  assimilated  with 
shet,  100;  and  for  the  cattle  tether  the  name  mezt  is  taken  from  inez,  10. 

There  are  also  some  interesting  notes  (p.  223)  on  the  nature  and  use  of  various 
signs,  especially  with  reference  to  Dr.  Erman's  list.  The  so-called  bier  in  the  late 
writing  of  the  name  of  Osiris,  is  really  a  chair,  merely  a  variant  form  of  the  throne 
as.  The  whole  of  these  eight  pages  should  be  carefully  noted  in  any  study  of  the 
forms  and  variant  values  of  signs,  being  full  of  references  and  examples. 

Zwei  demotische  Urkunden  aus  GebeUti. — W.  Spiegelberg.  These  two  con- 
tracts are  now  at  Strassburg.  One  has  a  Greek  tax-receipt,  and  is  dated  in 
the  33rd  year  of  Ptolemy  Lathyrus.  A  great  part  of  it  is  occupied  with  an 
immense  protocol  of  the  Ptolemaic  priesthoods  ;  the  business  is  the  sale  of  a  small 
plot  of  land  in  the  south  of  Pathyris,  of  about  3,500  square  feet,  but  no  price  is 

C  3 


38  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

named.     The  second  papyrus  is  dated  in  103-2  B.C.  under  Ptolemy  XI,  Alexander, 
and  Berenice  III;  it  is  a  contract  of  sale  of  a  mare,  but,  again,  no  price  is  named. 

Der  histempel  von  Behbct  {2te  Teil).—C  C.  Edgar  and  GiJNTHER  Roedkr. 
The  immense  tumbled  pile  of  blocks  of  red  granite  which  marks  the  site  of  the 
great  Iseum,  is  the  result  of  mining  out  all  the  limestone  for  burning.  No  attempt 
has  been  made  to  copy  and  publish  all  the  sculptures,  but  the  above  authors  have 
made  a  hand  list  of  the  blocks  and  copied  the  longer  inscriptions.  The  list  is 
continued  in  the  present  paper.  It  is  necessarily  a  work  more  of  piety  than  profit 
The  only  satisfactory  thing  would  be  to  draw  all  the  blocks,  with  note  of  position 
and  probable  connections,  and  then  refit  the  scenes.  This  might  result  in  a  general 
view  of  the  whole  system  of  the  sculptures. 

La  Fabrication  du  vin  dans  les  tombeaux. — Pierre  Montet.  In  the  Old 
Kingdom  only  dark  grapes  are  represented,  and  the  wine  must  have  been  red. 
At  Bersheh  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  white  grapes  are  seen,  and  the  juice  is  light, 
such  as  would  make  white  wine.  Most  of  the  paper  is  occupied  with  the  examples 
of  extraction  of  the  juice  from  the  crushed  grapes  by  wringing  the  mass  in 
a  twisted  cloth.  The  force  was  applied  by  twisting  the  cloth  with  two  poles,  each 
held  by  two  men  ;  to  prevent  it  drawing  together  into  a  knot,  a  fifth  man  forced 
the  poles  apart  with  his  hands  and  feet.  The  fixed  frame  to  hold  the  cloth,  and 
twist  it  from  one  end  only,  first  appears  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  and  was  but 
gradually  taken  into  use  for  wine  making.  The  writer  does  not  notice  a  large 
drawing  of  a  fixed  frame  in  the  temple  of  Sety  at  Abydos  (Caulfeild,  Temple 
of  the  Kings,  XX,  4). 

Inscriptions  liistoriques  Mendesiennes. — G.  Daressy.  The  Roman  buildings 
of  Egypt  are  incessantly  being  destroyed  for  the  sake  of  re-using  the  bricks ; 
indeed,  the  Department  of  Antiquities  sells  the  right  of  destroj'ing  Roman 
buildings,  without  any  examination  or  knowledge  of  what  they  may  be.  In  the 
course  of  this  destruction  of  antiquities,  a  stray  block  of  re-used  sandstone  was 
found  at  Mendes,  bearing  two  inscriptions  of  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty.  These  relate 
to  important  persons  hitherto  unknown,  as  indeed  the  history  of  this  region  has 
scarcely  been  touched.  First,  there  is  a  general  Hor-nekht ;  his  son  was  the 
governor  Nesi-ba-neb-daddu,  who  married  the  priestess  of  the  Ram  of  Mendes 
Khau-sen-ast,  and  had  a  son,  the  governor  Hor-nekht.  M.  Daressy  would  see  in 
one  of  these  Hor-nekhts  the  personage  named  in  the  beginning  of  the  Story  of  the 
Breast-plate;  but  the  period  seems  to  be  different.  The  Story  of  the  Breast- 
plate is  dated  by  the  names  of  three  rulers  being  the  same  as  those  of  Esarhaddon's 
vassals,  which  ties  it  to  shortly  before  670  B.C.  The  present  inscription  names 
both  the  first  and  second  Hor-nekht  as  "great  chief  of  the  Ma(shauasha),"  a  title 
which  was  usual  in  the  XXIInd  dynasty  and  lasted  down  to  the  time  of  Piankhy, 
725  B.C.  This  title  suggests  that  the  Hor-nekht  here  is  of  an  earlier  generation 
than  the  time  of  Esarhaddon.  A  very  curious  phrase  is  that  the  god  Ba-neb-daddu 
"  appoints  to  his  Tanites  {K/tent-abtiu)  that  they  should  acknowledge  Hor-nekht 
as  master  of  the  temple."  This  shews  that  Tanis  was  at  this  time  subject  to 
Mendes. 

The  .second  inscription  is  dated  in  the  i  ith  year  of  a  king  whose  cartouches 
have  never  been  filled  in.  This  strange  omission  cannot  be  accounted  for  by 
political  uncertainty,  or  the  number  of  the  year  would  not  have  been  inserted,  nor 
would  it  have  shown  so  long  a  reign.     Wq  c^^^  only  suppose  that  the  precise  form 


} 


Recueil  de  Travaux.  39 

of  the  royal  titles  was  not  known  to  the  scribe.  This  is  a  record  of  the  joyous 
entry  of  Hor-nekht  into  Mendes.  They  seem  to  have  had  a  right  of  popular 
acceptance  of  a  ruler,  as  it  is  said  that  they  "  approved  his  father  when  he  took 
possession,"  and  they  rejoiced  when  the  great  heir  of  his  house  was  in  his  rightful 
place.  Evidently  tjiere  had  been  a  civil  war,  as  Hor-nekht  is  said  to  have  beaten 
his  competitor. 

Notes  sur  les  XX 11',  XX HI'  el  XXIV'  dynasties. — G.  Daressy.  This  paper 
shows  how  little  we  know  for  certain  about  the  period.  There  are  more  than 
thirty  documents  quoted,  and  from  these  is  put  together  a  tentative  table  of 
two  continuous  and  independent  lines  of  kings  of  the  Delta  and  kings  of  the 
Thebaid.  Stress  is  laid  on  contiguous  or  overlapping  reigns  having  the  titles 
"  Divine  prince  of  Thebes  "  and  "  Divine  prince  of  Heliopolis,"  as  implying  separate 
rule.  As,  however,  such  titles  do  not  imply  only  a  local  rule  in  the  XVIIIth-XXth 
dynasty,  they  need  not  do  so  here.  The  two  essential  matters  are  (t)  the 
genealogy  of  Uasarkon  I,  father  of  High-Priest  Sheshenq,  father  of  High-Priest 
Horsaast,  the  latter  occurring  in  the  6th  year  of  Sheshenq  IH,  se-bast ;  (2)  that 
the  1st  year  of  Pedubast  was  in  the  7th  year  of  Sheshenq  HI.  These  facts 
must  bring  Pedubast  back  to  about  a  century  after  the  beginning  of  the  XXHnd 
dynasty,  and  thus  force  the  XXIHrd  dynasty  to  overlap  the  end  of  the  family 
of  the  XXHnd  dynasty. 

Before  accepting  the  entire  change  of  there  being  two  rival  lines  throughout, 
it  is  well  to  see  how  far  the  new  facts  compel  alterations  in  the  simple  list 
already  recognised.  Taking  that  in  the  Student's  History  of  Egypt,  there  are 
no  fresh  facts  incompatible  with  the  outlines  of  the  XXHnd  dynasty  there  stated. 
The  change  required  is  in  the  rise  of  the  XXHIrd  dynasty.  The  High-Priest 
Horsaast,  grandson  of  Uasarkon  I,  assumed  the  royal  title  in  the  Thebaid  (Koptos), 
and  is  probably  the  father  of  Pedubast,  who  began  his  reign  in  the  7th  year  of 
Sheshenq  HI.  Perhaps  the  independence  of  Horsaast  started  with  Sheshenq  HI, 
as  his  father  Takelat  1 1,  j^-aj/,  certainly  ruled  the  Thebaid.  Thus  the  XXHnd 
dynasty  ruled  alone  for  at  least  115  years,  or  rather  more.  This  points  to 
the  120  years'  total  of  Africanus  being  the  true  length  of  the  dynasty.  Then 
the  last  three  kings  Sheshenq  HI,  Pimay,  and  Sheshenq  IV  were  overlapped  by 
the  XXHIrd  dynasty,  and  were  accordingly  not  counted  in  the  chronology  of 
Manetho. 

In  the  XXHIrd  dynasty  there  must  be  added  a  Takelath,  for  at  least  fifteen 
years,  between  Pedubast  and  Uasarkon  HI.  The  main  question  now  is  the 
filling  of  the  time.  Sheshenq  I  began  his  reign  about  952,  or  perhaps  later,  if 
his  Judaean  campaign  was  long  before  the  sculpture  of  it  at  Karnak.  Possibly 
it  might  be  ten  years  earlier,  and  if  so  the  reign  began  942.  Shabaka  began 
his  reign  715,  so  the  XXIInd-XXIVth  dynasty  should  cover  237  or,  at  least, 
about  227  years.  If  there  be  120  years  in  the  XXHnd,  and  six  years  in  the 
XXIVth,  the  XXHIrd  dynasty  must  have  been  11 1  years,  or  rather  less.  We 
have  on  record  :  Horsaast  6  years,  Pedubast  40  years,  Takelat  15  or  more  years, 
Uasarkon  HI  8  years,  Psammus  10  years,  and  the  entry  of  Zet  31  years,  making 
up  1 10  years.  Thus  it  is  essential  to  retain  the  period  of  Zet  to  fill  up  the  total 
period.  As  to  the  meaning  of  this  entry  some  account  will  be  seen  in  another 
article  of  this  Journal.  The  probable  results,  following  the  older  view  and 
Africanus,  stand  as  follows,  stating  the  length  of  reign  up  to  the  beginning  of 
a  co-regency : — 

C  4 


40 


Recueil  de  Travaux. 


XXIiND   DYNASTY. 


Sheshenq  I 

..     B.C.  952-930^ 

Uasarkon  I 

930-900 

Takelat  I 

900-877 

►   1 20  years  Africanus. 

Uasarkon  II  se-bast 

877-854 

Sheshenq  II 

854-854 

Takelat  II  se-ast 

854-832  J 

XXII Ird  dynasty 

Sheshenq  III 

832-781 

Horsaast 

832-826 

Pedubast 

826-786 

Pamay     ... 

781-781 

Takelat  III  heq  uast     . . . 

786-770 

Uasarkon  III      

770-762 

Sheshenq  IV 

781-744 

Psammus 

762-752 

Zet           

752-721 

XXIVth  dynasty. 

Bakennauf  721-715 

XXVth  dynasty. 
Shabaka 715- 

Thus  the  XXI Ind  dynasty  was  truly  reckoned  at  120  years  by  Africanus, 
and  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty  was  89  years  as  in  Africanus,  plus  6  years  of  Horsaast 
and  16  years  of  Takelat  III,  omitted  by  Africanus. 

On  the  other  hand,  abandoning  the  stated  reckoning,  the  loose  fragments 
are  adjusted  by  M.  Daressy  as  follows,  going  back  from  Shabaka  at  715  B.C.: — 


Delta. 


Thebaid. 


Sheshenq  I 
Uasarkon  I 
Uasarkon  II 
Sheshenq  II 
Anput 

Sheshenq  III 
Pimay 
Sheshenq  V 
Tafnekht... 
Bakenranf 


941-920 

920-880 
880-857 

857-837 
837-832 
832-780 
780-768 
768-729 
-721 
721-715 


Takelat  I 
Horsaast... 
Pedubast... 
Sheshenq  IV 
Takelat  II 
Uasarkon  III 
Uasarkon  IVl 
Takelat  III    J 
Piankhy  ... 


905-880 
-851 
851-826 
826-821 
821-791 
791-760 

760- 
746- 


Zzvet  Kaufertrdge  aus  der  Zeit  des  Konigs  Harmachis. — W.  SPIEGELBERG. 
These  two  demotic  documents  are  of  historic  interest  as  they  are  dated  in  the 
4th  year  of  King  Har-em-aakhuti,  an  Ethiopian  king  of  Thebes.  The  same  notary 
who  drew  up  these  documents,  Pedyamenapt  son  of  Pedy-amen-nesut-taui,  is  also 
known  to  have  drawn  up  documents  in  the  12th  and  15th  years  of  Ptolemy  IV, 
Philopator,  210-207  B.C.  We  therefore  know  that  this  Ethiopian  king  probably 
held  Thebes  within  about  twenty-five  years  of  that  time,  say  somewhere  between 
about  235  and  185  B.C.  Coins  of  Ptolemy  III  and  IV  were  found  with  these 
documents,  quite  confirming  the  general  period.  Dr.  Spiegelberg  believes  that  this 
king  preceded  Onkh-em-aakhuti,  who  is  also  known  in  Theban  documents. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  what  is  known  of  the  general  history.  We  find  that,  at 
Philae,  Ergamenes  the  Ethiopian  built  between  the  works  of  Ptolemy  IV  and  V, 
showing  that  the  Ethiopian  occupation   there  lay  somewhere  between   220  and 


Recueil  de  Travaux.  41 

182  B.C.  At  Dakkeh  Ergamenes  built  the  inner  part,  and  Ptolemy  IV  the  outer 
part  of  the  temple ;  probably,  therefore,  he  did  this  within  the  reign  of  Philopator, 
222-204  B.C.  And  not  only  Ergamenes,  but  also  his  successors,  must  have  been 
within  these  limits,  for  Ptolemy  IV  to  have  re-gained  Dakkeh  again  after  them. 
As  we  cannot  puj  these  three  Ethiopian  kings  between  207  (the  dating  by 
Pedyamenapt  under  Philopator)  and  204  the  end  of  the  reign,  it  seems  they  must 
have  ruled  between  220  and  210  B.C.  Probably  the  whole  force  of  Egypt  was 
needed  in  Syria  to  resist  Antiochus  in  219  B.C.  and  onward,  and  it  was  then  that 
Ergamenes  occupied  Upper  Egypt,  and  was  succeeded  by  Hor-em-aakhuti  and 
Onkh-em-aakhuti  before  210  B.C.,  at  which  year  the  scribe  dates  again  by 
Philopator.  The  Edfu  inscription  does  not  disprove  this,  as  it  was  written  at  the 
close  of  Philopator's  reign,  and  naturally  ignored  the  rule  of  the  usurpers  who  had 
passed  away. 

Returning  to  these  papyri,  which  were  found  in  the  Earl  of  Carnarvon's 
excavations  at  Thebes,  one  is  for  the  sale  of  a  small  plot  (430  square  feet)  of 
town  land,  and  the  other  for  the  sale  of  two  acres  of  agricultural  land.  According 
to  the  cautious  habit  of  that  age  no  price  is  named,  only  a  statement  is  made  that 
the  buyer  is  fully  satisfied  with  the  silver  received.  This  omission  of  what  is 
usually  considered  an  essential  part  of  a  sale  contract  may  have  been  due  to 
evading  a  part  of  the  percentage  of  government  tax  on  sales,  or  avoiding  an 
opening  for  future  litigation  about  the  full  receipt  of  the  amount.  Each  contract  is 
signed  by  the  usual  sixteen  witnesses.  The  details  of  the  boundaries  are  so  full 
that — as  in  the  case  of  the  Aswan  Aramaic  papyri — a  plan  of  the  region  can  be 
drawn  from  the  description. 

Recherches  sur  la  famille  dont  fait  partie  Montouenthat. — GEORGES  Legrain. 
(Continuation.)  2""  partie,  Les  Enfants  de  Khaemhor.  Branch  Nsipta/i.  The 
separate  documents  are  numbered. 

27.  Part  of  a  table  of  offerings  of  Amenardys,  daughter  of  King  Kashta,  and 

her  mother  Shepenapt,  daughter  of  King  Uasarkon.    Names  Mentuemhat 
born  of  Nesptah  and  Ast-khebt. 

28.  Table  of  offerings  of  Mentuemhat  born  of  Nesptah. 

29.  Base  for  a  statue,  of  the  same. 

30.  Another  base,  of  the  same. 

31.  Fragment  of  a  statue  of  Mentuemhat. 

32-3-4.  Half  discs  with  inscriptions  of  Mentuemhat ;  naming  also  Harmerti, 
son  of  Mert-ne-horu,  son  of  Hon 

36.  Fragment  of  black   granite  statue  of  Hor,  son  of  Mentuemhat,  son   of 

Nesmin  ;  not  the  preceding  man. 

37.  Headless  statue  of  Mentuemhat,  found  in  the  temple  of  Mut, 

38.  Statue  of  Mentuemhat,  of  black  granite,  at  Berlin. 

39.  Bust  of  Mentuemhat ;  temple  of  Mut. 

40.  Table  of  offerings  of  Mentuemhatsenb,  XXVIth  dynasty. 

41.  Bricks  of  Mentuemhat,  probably  from  his  tomb. 

42.  Ushabtis  of  Mentuemhat. 

43.  Genii  of  the  tomb  of  Mentuemhat. 

44.  Tomb  of  Mentuemhat,  published  in  Mem.  Miss.  Franqaise  du  Caire,  V,  613. 

List  of  titles  quoted  here. 

45.  Fragment  of  scene  apparently  from  the  tomb  of  a  Prince  Mentuemhat. 


(      42      ) 


REVIEWS. 


Development  of  Religion  and  Thought  in  Ancient  Egypt. — By  James  Henry 
Breasted,  Ph.D.     8vo.     7s.  6d.    xix  +  379  PP-     (Hodder  and  Stoughton,  1912.) 

This  is  the  most  important  book  that  has  appeared  for  many  years  past  upon 
the  religion  of  Egypt.  It  gives  the  first  translations  and  summary  of  the  Pyramid 
Texts,  from  the  parallel  versions  issued  by  Dr.  Sethe.  Till  now  there  has  only  been 
the  original  edition  of  Sir  Gaston  Maspero,  with  his  first  French  translation,  which 
was  of  the  greatest  value  twenty  years  ago.  By  now,  a  fresh  handling  of  the 
subject  is  wanted  ;  Dr.  Sethe  has  finished  his  parallel  edition  of  all  the  versions  in 
different  pyramids  ;  Prof  Breasted  here  summarises  the  whole  view  of  these  oldest 
religious  documents,  and  we  only  now  wait  for  the  complete  translation  promised 
by  Dr.  Sethe,  which  all  scholars  will  hope  may  not  long  be  delayed. 

Dr.  Breasted  begins  with  an  outline  of  the  influence  of  Nature  on  the  religion, 
the  dominance  of  the  Sun-god,  Ra,  and  the  power  of  the  Nile  under  the  form  of 
Osiris.  Osiris  has  been  many  things  to  many  people, — god  of  the  dead,  god  of 
vegetation,  the  Nile-god,  the  deified  law-giver.  A  new  Plutarch  might  write  as 
puzzled  and  confused  account  of  him  as  did  the  ancient  speculator,  and  find  as 
many  possibilities  of  explanations.  This  book  gives  plenty  of  passages  enforcing 
the  connection  with  the  Nile  ;  but,  not  to  be  one-sided,  these  are  followed  by 
references  to  Osiris  as  the  Sea,  as  the  fertile  soil,  and  as  vegetation.  An  outline 
of  the  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus  myth  follows,  the  usual  late  version  of  which  is 
supported  by  passages  from  the  Pyramids. 

Having  dealt  with  the  mythologic  basis,  the  next  chapter  treats  of  the  life 
after  death,  the  primitive  tomb  dwelling  and  the  later  theologic  developments. 
The  view  of  the  ka  as  being  in  heaven  and  protecting  the  dead  in  the  future  is 
strongly  supported.  Yet  the  figures  which  show  the  ka  as  born  and  growing  with 
the  person  need  to  be  reconciled  with  this ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  separate 
the  ka  from  the  personality.  The  Nigerian  belief  in  the  ancestral  spirit,  in-dwelling 
and  acting  as  the  guardian  in  life  and  in  death,  seems  to  reconcile  all  the 
statements,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  a  previous  article. 

The  description  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  follows.  These  oldest  religious 
documents  are  shown  to  be  extremely  composite,  built  up  of  beliefs  of  three 
or  four  civilisations;  the  nature  of  their  contents  are  classified  as:  (i)  Ritual 
of  the  funeral  and  subsequent  offerings.  (2)  Magical  charms.  (3)  Very  ancient 
ritual  of  worship.  (4)  Ancient  religious  hymns,  (s)  Fragments  of  old  myths. 
(6)  Prayers  and  petitions  on  behalf  of  the  dead  king.  Their  historical  classification 
has  been  dealt  with  in  the  Drew  Lecture,  published  in  this  part,  and  will  therefore 
not  claim  our  notice  further.  The  next  chapter  shows  how  the  earlier  Osiris 
beliefs  were  overcoming  the  Ra  religion,  and  being  incorporated  with  it. 

Leaving  the  Pyramid  Age,  Prof  Breasted  then  launches  into  the  reaction  from 
faith  in  magic  powers,  and  sketches  the  disillusion  of  men  on  seeing  the  futility 
of  the  pyramids  and  tombs;  this  is  reflected  to  us  in  the  songs,  the  dialogues, 
and  the  laments  of  an  age  without  hope. 


Reviews.  43 

The  growth  of  a  belief  in  future  recompense  is  then  traced,  as  forced  on 
men's  minds  by  the  imperfection  and  injustice  of  this  life.  The  Osiris-worship 
of  the  primitive  people  became  much  amplified  ;  the  inequalities  of  conditions 
here  were  believed  to  be  rectified  by  the  examination  which  condemned  the  evil 
and  allowed  the  ggod  to  go  to  Osiris.  The  most  original  and  powerful  part  of 
the  book  is  a  restoration  of  the  scenes  of  the  funeral  feasts,  from  the  details 
given  in  the  endowment  lists.  Here  Prof  Breasted  has  done  what  every  scholar 
ought  to  do  with  his  knowledge,  applied  it  to  restore  the  past  to  our  imaginations. 
Such  a  sketch  from  one  who  knows  all  the  sources,  however  uncertain  some  detail 
may  be,  is  far  better  than  leaving  readers  entirely  in  the  dark  as  to  the  sense 
and  value  of  a  list  of  details. 

The  astonishing  and  brilliant  episode  of  the  Aten-worship — the  greatest 
idealism  in  the  world  before  Christianity — is  described,  none  too  fully.  Lastly, 
the  rise  of  individual  religion  is  sketched,  but  without  coming  down  to  the 
Alexandrian  development  under  Oriental  influence,  which  is  the  most  important 
to  us. 

We  must  heartily  congratulate  the  author  on  this  volume.  It  shows  throughout 
the  first  qualification  for  writing  on  the  religion — a  sympathy  with  the  different 
beliefs  on  religion  and  ethics — a  requirement  which  has  hitherto  been  almost  the 
prerogative  of  Dr.  Wiedemann,  and  which  has  been  lamentably  absent  from 
some  other  works  on  the  subject.  Scholastic  precision  may  translate  business 
documents,  but  something  much  larger  is  needful  when  we  come  to  human  faiths 
and  feelings.  Dr.  Breasted  has  that  needful  something,  and  it  would  be  fortunate 
if  he  would  apply  it  to  a  translation  of  the  whole  Pyramid  Texts,  and  an  historical 
analysis  of  their  various  origins. 

Papyrus  Fun&aires  de  la  XXI'  dynastie.  Le  Papyrus  hia-oglyphique  de 
Kamara,  et  Le  Papyrus  hitfratique  de  Nesikhonsou,  au  Muse'e  du  Caire. — Ed.  Naville. 
4to,  38  pp.,  30  plates.     (Leroux,  Paris,  1912.) 

This  beautiful  publication  is  the  finest  yet  issued  on  the  Book  of  the  Dead. 
The  plates  exceed  in  clearness  even  those  of  the  papyrus  of  louiya,  issued  by 
Prof.  Naville  five  years  ago.  We  are  indebted  to  this  volume  for  two  illustrations 
here  (Figs.  21,  22),  which  will  show  how  successfully  the  rendering  of  the  papyri 
has  been  made.  The  papyrus  of  Queen  Kamara  (often  called  Ra-ma-ka)  of  the 
XXIst  dynasty  has  long  been  known  from  some  photographs  of  parts  of  it.  It  is 
here  given  on  ten  plates,  which  comprise  Chapters  i,  6,  "jj,  79,  82,  83,  85,  86,  87,  99, 
100,  105,  no,  123,  125,  138,  144,  146,  148,  149,  150,  151,  in  a  very  irregular  order, 
beginning  with  Chapters  151  and  6.  One  very  short  new  chapter  appears,  compiled 
out  of  sentences  from  well-known  passages.  Prof  Naville  adheres  to  the  old  view 
that  Mut-em-hat  was  the  infant  child  of  Queen  Ka-ma-ra,  and  is  much  surprised  at 
her  having  the  full  titles  of  royal  wife.  But  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  Mutemhat 
was  not  the  personal  name  of  the  great  heiress-queen  who  took  the  royal  cartouche 
Ka-ma-ra  ;  exactly  as  Hatshepsut  took  the  same  cartouche  long  before.  The 
name  Mutemhat  occurs  twice  in  the  papyrus,  in  just  the  same  manner  as  the  name 
of  Kamara,  without  any  suggestion  of  being  a  different  person.  On  the  sarco- 
phagus the  two  cartouches  are  set  out  together  side  by  side  with  their  preliminary 
titles.  We  do  not  really  know  the  name  of  the  infant  who  was  buried  with  Queen 
Kamara  Mutemhat. 

The  papyrus  of  Nesikhonsu  I,  wife  of  Pinezem  II,  is  not  such  fine  work  as  the 
preceding.     It  occupies  thirty  plates,  with  Some  fairly  good  scenes  and   figures. 


44  Reviews. 

It  contains  the  Chapters  i,  2,  4,  5,  6,  10  or  48,  17,  31,  38,  41,  55,  63,  65,  7J,  81,  82, 
83,  84,  85,  86,  95,  97,  98,  99,  100,  102,  103,  104,  105,  107,  109,  no.  III,  112,  113. 
125,  136,  153.  It  is  much  to  be  hoped  that  Prof.  Naville  will  publish  further  texts 
in  the  admirable  manner  of  these  plates. 

Christian  Antiquities  in  the  Nile  Valley. — SOMER.S  Clarke,  F.S.A.  4to, 
234  pp.,  56  plates,  42  figures.     (Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.) 

In  no  land  is  Christian  architecture  so  neglected  as  in  Egypt ;  fortunately 
it  has  now  found  a  competent  recorder  in  the  former  architect  to  our  St.  Paul's 
Cathedral.  Mr.  Somers  Clarke  has  for  years  past  hunted  over  1,400  miles  for  the 
little  neglected  shrines  from  Soba  down  to  Antinoe,  pathetic  relics  that  have 
survived  twelve  centuries  of  continued  persecutions. 

In  this  volume  are  full  plans,  many  sections,  and  some  elevations,  beside 
maps  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  the  full  amount  of  work  collected  here,  as  there  is 
no  table  of  contents,  and  the  churches  are  not  numbered.  A  very  full  index  partly 
compensates  for  this  difficulty.  The  main  interest  to  most  readers  will  lie  in  the 
two  grandest  buildings,  the  White  and  Red  Monasteries  near  Sohag :  of  these  a 
considerable  account  is  given,  pending  the  great  official  publication  which  is 
some  day  to  come.  Not  only  is  the  long  line  of  churches  great  and  small  described 
here,  but  the  use  and  system  of  them  is  considered,  and  an  account  of  the  present 
method  of  building  illustrates  the  actual  construction.  It  is,  indeed,  fortunate  that 
the  churches  have  found  a  recorder,  before  they  further  disappear.  A  zealous 
photographer  could  not  do  better  than  take  this  volume  for  guide  book,  and  put  on 
permanent  record  the  architectural  appearance  of  all  the  buildings.  • 

The  Fate  of  Empires. — A.  J.  HUBBARD,  M.D.  8vo.,  220  pp.  (Longmans.) 
Though  this  book  only  refers  secondarily  to  Egypt,  yet  its  principle  of  "  an 
inquiry  into  the  stability  of  civilisation  "  is  so  wide-spread  that  it  needs  notice  here, 
as  enabling  us  to  see  the  meaning  of  Egyptian  civilisation.  The  author's  main 
view  is  the  distinction  of  two  opposing  forces  in  all  civilisations.  One  force  is  the 
Family  Instinct,  which  looks  to  the  exaltation  of  the  Race,  past  and  future,  under 
religious  sanctions.  The  other  force  is  the  Social  Instinct,  which  looks  to  Society 
as  an  end,  and  makes  the  immediate  interests  of  the  present  dominant  under 
selfish  Reason.     Each  of  these  forces  is  needful  for  the  general  welfare. 

Their  effects  are  shown  by  their  excesses.  If  the  Family  overpower  Society 
the  result  may  be  seen  in  Egypt,  and  now  in  China,  with  its  immense  overcrowding, 
lack  of  national  solidarity,  and  all  ends  and  means  justified  by  the  family  benefit. 
This  form  of  life  is,  however,  permanent,  and  capable  of  bearing  almost  any  shocks  and 
troubles  without  collapse.  If  Society  overpower  the  Family  the  result  is  seen  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  where  the  height  of  felicity  was  to  exhaust  all  capital  and  possible 
means  of  pleasure  for  the  present  individual,  totally  regardless  of  the  Race. 
Socialism  is  the  form  of  this  order  of  things,  and  the  result  is  extinction.  The 
author  concludes  that  no  civilisation  founded  on  purely  selfish  Reason  can  be 
perrnanent ;  and  that  the  family  instinct,  and  its  religious  sanctions,  are  necessarily 
essential  to  any  lasting  system  of  racial  existence. 


(    45     ) 


^  NOTES   AND    NEWS. 


The  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt  has  for  several  years  been  steadily 

clearing  the  country  from  Cairo  southward.     Various  existing  rights  of  excavation 

have  stood  in  the  way,  and  have  been  respected  by  leaving  such  sites  in  their  present 

state  of  neglect.     But  the  series  of  clearances  made  at  Gizeh,  Memphis,  Mazghuneh, 

Shurafeh,  Tarkhan,  Riqqeh,  Gerzeh,  and  Meydum  have  opened  up  and  published 

every  site  of  this  region  which  is  not  kept  waiting  for  other  excavators.     In  the 

coming  season  this  work  will  continue  further  southwards.     One  camp  will  begin 

on  the  Gebel  Abusir  at  Harageh,  where  an  immense  cemetery  of  the  Xllth  dynasty 

lies  still  untouched  in  modern  times.     This  part  of  the  work  is  in  the  hands  of 

Mr.  Engelbach,  who  did  so  well  on  the  cemetery  of  Riqqeh  last  year :  he  is  at 

present   helped  by   Mr.    Guy   Brunton,  Mr.  Battiscombe  Gunn,  and  Mr.  Willey, 

Another    very    promising    subject    is    the    small     pyramid     adjoining    that    of 

Senusert  II  at  Lahun.     Twenty-five  years  ago.  Prof  Petrie  found  the  core  of  this 

pyramid,  and  cleared  over  the  whole  region  of  it  without  reaching  an  entrance.     He 

is  now  going  to  return,  with  clues  which  have  come  to  light  since  that  time.     As 

this  pyramid  is  probably  that  of  the  queen  of  Senusert,  it  may  prove  of  much 

interest.     This  work  will  be  joined  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brunton,  Rev.  C.  T.  Campion 

who  worked  at  Tarkhan  last  season.  Dr.  Amsden,  and  Mr.  F".  J.  Frost.    Mrs.  Flinders 

Petrie  will  again  undertake  the  drawing  of  the  antiquities  during  the  season,  as  in 

each  year. 

Dr.  Reisner  will  carry  on  his  great  clearances  at  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  on 
which  he  has  been  engaged  for  so  many  years. 

Mr.  Quibeil  is  continuing  the  e.xcavations  at  Saqqareh  for  the  Egyptian 
Government.  He  expects  to  clear  a  cemetery  of  the  Roman  Age  this  winter,  if 
an  important  change  should  not  officially  supervene. 

Mr.  Mace  will  be  at  work  on  the  pyramid  of  Amenemhat  I  at  Lisht,  in 
continuance  of  the  work  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  New  York. 

Dr.  Borchardt  will  excavate  between  El-Badari  and  Hawara  in  the  Fayum. 

The  Italian  work  will  be  at  Kum  Ghirzeh  near  El-Rodah  in  the  Fayum. 

Further  south,  Mr.  J.  de  M.  Johnson  is  going  to  excavate  at  Antinoe,  for  the 
Graeco-Roman  Branch  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund.  It  is  hoped  that  such 
an  important  Greek  city  may  yield  papyri,  although  it  has  been  much  searched. 

Mr.  Blackman  will  continue  the  work  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  at  Meir. 

The  German  work  will  be  renewed  which  was  so  successful  last  season  at 
Tell  Amarna,  where  a  sculptor's  workshop  was  found. 


46  Notes  and  News. 

Daninos  Pasha  will  take  up  the  search  at  Eshmuneyn,  in  furtherance  of  the 
discoveries  made  there  in  recent  years. 

Antaeopolis  (Qau  el-Kebyr)  and  five  miles  southward  to  Nawawrah  will  be 
the  ground  of  Prof  SteindorfTs  excavations. 

Further  south  still,  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund,  in  resuming  the  work  on  the 
Osireion  at  Abydos,  has  sent  Mr.  Wainwright  (who  has  earned  his  spurs  in  the 
British  School)  to  carry  on  the  excavations,  which  will  be  directed  by  Prof  Naville, 
assisted  by  Prof  VVhittemore.  It  is  hoped  this  season  to  push  on  the  clearing  of 
this  great  subterranean  structure  up  to  its  contact  with  the  Temple  of  Sety.  The 
subsidence  in  the  axis  of  that  temple  (published  in  1902)  naturally  leads  to  the 
idea  that  some  subterranean  structure  underlies  it.  The  copies  of  the  Sinai 
inscriptions,  which  were  made  in  1905,  are  now  being  finally  arranged  for  publication 
by  Mr.  Eric  Peet  and  Dr.  Alan  Gardiner. 

At  Thebes  there  will  be  the  usual  concentration  of  workers.  Mr.  N.  de  G.  Davies 
is  continuing  the  great  task  of  preserving  the  paintings  in  facsimile  copies. 
Mr.  Howard  Carter  continues  the  work  of  the  Earl  of  Carnarvon  at  El-Birfibeh, 
Mr.  VVinlock  for  New  York  is  working  out  the  palace  of  Amenhotep  III  at  Mayata. 
Mr.  Lythgoe  continues  the  work  at  El-Asasif  Mr.  H.  Barton  is  working  for 
Mr.  Theodore  Davis  on  the  south  of  Medinet  Habu  temple,  Dr.  Moller  for  Berlin 
will  probably  work  at  Der  el-Medineh,  Mr.  Robert  Mond  has  organized  the  very 
necessary  work  of  clearing,  repairing,  and  photographing  the  painted  tombs  of 
Thebes,  which  are  so  priceless  for  their  pictures  of  Egyptian  life.  Mr.  Mackay 
(who  so  long  worked  with  the  British  School)  is  now  carrying  out  this  work  in  a 
systematic  manner,  one  of  the  most  needful  tasks,  which  ought  to  have  been 
performed  long  ago  by  the  Government. 

At  Aulad  Yahia  in  Nubia  Mr.  West  will  begin  excavating. 

Rumours  are  afloat  that  a  royal  tomb  was  robbed  last  summer  ;  and  that  the 
obelisk  of  Senusert  I,  which  has  stood  in  its  place  for  5,000  years  at  Heliopolis,  is 
to  be  desecrated  to  ornamenting  a  garden  in  Cairo  !  It  may  be  a  question  whether 
the  fallen  colossi  of  Memphis  are  best  in  their  place,  or  in  city  squares  ;  but  to 
carry  off  the  oldest  obelisk  in  Egypt,  which  has  stood  in  its  own  place  unmoved 
through  most  of  history,  for  a  trivial  piece  of  decoration  which  will  be  out  of  date 
in  a  few  generations,  would  be  a  degradation  of  antiquity. 


(     47     ) 

THE  EGYPTIAN  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

This  Association  was  founded  eight  years  ago  for  the  large  number  of  persons  who 
wish  to  keep  in  touch  with  research  in  Egypt.  It  is  expressly  connected  with 
the  British  School  8f  Archaeology,  to  which  it  contributes,  and  by  which  it  is 
supplied  with  travelling  series  of  small  antiquities  sent  on  loan  to  the  various 
branches.  Reports  on  the  current  work  are  also  supplied  to  the  meetings.  Anyone 
wishing  to  open  a  local  centre  should  apply  to  the  founder,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones, 
1 8,  Bedford  Square,  London.  The  papers  for  the  present  season  are  here  given,  with 
the  addresses  to  which  application  should  be  made  for  membership  (35.  or  4.5'.  yearly). 

London.  (Hon.  Sec,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  18,  Bedford  Square,  W.C.) — First  Meeting,  Oct.  15, 
at  the  above  address  ;  8  p.m.,  tea  and  coffee,  8.30  p.m.,  lecture  :  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie,  on 
"  Unwritten  History."  Nov.  27,  Dr.  Alan  Gardiner,  on  "  Egyptian  Ethics  "  (to  be  published  in  our 
April  number).  Dec.  5,  Reading  of  Drew  Lecture  on  "  The  Egyptians'  Belief  in  a  Future  Life." 
Dec.  II,  Prof.  P.  E.  Newberry,  on  "The  North-western  Delta,  its  People  and  their  Cults." 
Jan.  23,  Dr.  Haddon,  on  "  Study  of  Savages."  Feb.  26,  Miss  Murray,  on  "  Ancestor  Cults." 
May  Meeting,  at  University  College,  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie's  lantern-lecture  on  New  Discoveries. 

BoURNE.vioUTH.  (Miss  E.  Allis-Smith,  Martello  Towers,  Branksome  Park.) — Dec.  8,  3.30p.m., 
at  Kelton  Manor  Road  (Mrs.  Fane),  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  on  "  Prof  Flinders  Petrie's  recent  Work," 
showing  some  of  the  objects  found.  Jan.  14,  3.30  p.m.,  at  Shalimar,  Wilderton  Road,  Branksome 
Park  (Mrs.  Claude  Lyon),  lantern-lecture  by  Claude  Lyon,  on  "  The  Temple  of  Abu  Simbel." 
Meetings,  Feb.  and  Mar.,  Ilird  and  IVth  dynasties. 

Edinburgh.  (Mrs.  Melville,  16,  Carlton  Street.)— Oct.  28,  3  p.m.,  in  Heriot  Watt  College, 
lantern-lecture,  Mrs.  Flinders  Petrie,  on  "  Recent  Excavations  of  a  1st  dynasty  Site,"  followed  by 
a  demonstration  in  the  Royal  Scottish  Museum.     Other  meetings  not  named. 

Farnham.  (Miss  G.  D.  Buckle,  Brackenhurst,  Farnham.)— Oct.  31,  Miss  G.  Buckle,  on 
"Temple  Ritual."  Dec.  4,  Mrs.  Milne,  on  "Funerary  Rites."  Jan.,  Brigadier-General  Mitford, 
C.B.,  D.S.O.,  on  "  Berber." 

Gl.\sgow.  (Miss  Bruce  Murray,  17,  University  Gardens.) — Oct.  29,  8.30  p.m.,  in  University, 
lantern-lecture  by  Mrs.  Flinders  Petrie,  on  "  Recent  Excavations  of  a  1st  dynasty  Site."  Nov.  25, 
4  p.m.,  in  Park  Parish  Church  Hall,  Rev.  A.  C.  Baird,  B.D.,  on  "  Relations  of  Egypt  to  neighbour- 
ing States,  XlXth  dynasty  onwards."  Jan.  14,  3  p.m..  Prof.  Stevenson,  D.Litt.,  on  "A  Storyteller 
of  Fifth  Century  B.C."  Feb.  17,  4  p.m.,  Dr.  J.  D.  Falconer,  on  "Traces  of  Early  Egyptian  Culture 
in  Western  Sudan."     Mar.,  Evening  meeting. 

H.^STINGS.  (Mrs.  Russell  Morris,  Quarry  Hill  Lodge,  St.  Leonards.)— Oct.,  Paper  on  "The 
Hittites."  Nov.,  Rev.  J.  D.  Gray,  on  "Neolithic  Age."  Dec.  I,  Mrs.  Purdon,  on  "Ancient 
Egyptian  Magic."  Jan.,  Dr.  Yanton,  on  "  The  Egyptian  Lotus."  Feb.,  Lecture  by  J.  S.  Parkin. 
Mar.,  Paper  on  the  Cretans. 

Reic.ate.  (.Mrs.  Paul,  Hilton  Lodge.)— Oct.  17,  "Readings  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead." 
Nov.  13,  "  Mythology  and  Religion  of  primitive  people  and  Ideal  of  God."  Dec.  4,  "The  Abode 
of  the  Blessed,  and  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life."  Jan.,  Feb.,  and  Mar.,  Lectures  by  Miss  L.  Eckenstein, 
on  "  .Mummies,"  "  Amulets,"  "  Dress,  Religious  and  Secular." 

Ross-ON-WVE.  (Mrs.  Marshall,  Gayton  Hall.)— Oct.  30,  Miss  Harvey,  on  "Ancient  Civilisation 
of  Crete."  Nov.  26,  First  Paper  of  the  Historical  course,  1st,  llnd,  and  Ilird  dynasties.  Dec.  31, 
Historical  course  continued. 

TiNTAGEL.  (Mrs.  Harris,  St.  Piran's.)— Oct.  6,  "  Prehistoric  Egypt  and  the  First  Three 
Dynasties."  Nov.  3,  on  "  Recent  Discoveries."  Dec.  l,  "  On  Flints,  Jewellery,  etc."  Mar.  or 
April,  Prehistoric. 

In  addition  to  the  E.R.S.A.,  there  is  a  Local  Society  for  Manchester,  entitled  the  Manchester 
Egyptian  and  Oriental  Society,  which  has  always  worked  in  collaboration  with  us. 

Manchester.  (Miss  W.  .M.  Crompton,  The  University.)— Oct.  6,  4.30  p.m..  Prof.  Flinders 
Petrie,  on  "  Early  Cylinders  and  Scarabs."  Oct.  27,  8  p.m..  Prof.  Elliot  Smith,  on  "  The  Foreign 
Influence  of  Egypt  during  the  Old  Kingdom."  Nov.  14,  Dr.  Louis  Gray,  on  "Zoroastrianism  and 
other  Material  in  Ada  Sanclortim."  Dec.  8,  5  p.m.,  Rev.  J.  A.  Meeson,  on  "  Wisdom  Literature." 
Dec.  15,  8  p.m..  Dr.  Alan  Gardiner,  on  "Egyptian  Hieroglyphic  Writing."  Lectures  for  1914,  by 
Mr.  W.  Burton,  on  "Egyptian  Glazed  Ware";  by  H.  R.  Hall,  on  "Greek  Monasteries"; 
Prof.  A.  Dickie,  on  "  The  Origin  and  Development  of  Building  amongst  the  Jews"  ;  Prof.  Lehmann- 
Haupt,  on  "Tigranokerta  Rediscovered";  and  A.  M.  Blackman,  on  "The  Painted  Tombs  at  Meir." 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


(    48     ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 


1.  This  head  is  certainly  a  portrait  of  Amenemhat  III.  It  is  of  the  same 
peculiar  physiognomy  and  expression  as  the  large,  seated  figure  in  the  Cairo 
Museum,  which  was  found  on  the  site  of  the  Labyrinth  at  Hawara.  That  figure, 
in  fine  condition,  and  bearing  the  full  names  of  the  king,  served  to  fix  for  us  his 
portraiture.  Here  we  see  the  same  curiously  flat  cheeks,  the  slight  nose,  and  the 
thin  compressed  mouth,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  this  king,  and  so  different 
from  any  other  head  that  we  know.  In  the  flat  face  and  narrow  lips  perhaps,  of  all 
kings,  Henry  VII  is  the  nearest  parallel.  There  is  none  of  the  full  vitality  and 
obvious  strength  which  are  so  plainly  seen  in  Senusert  I,  or  Senusert  III.  It  is 
difficult  to  imagine  such  a  man,  with  an  almost  pathological  look  of  ill-health, 
raising  the  Labyrinth,  the  greatest  temple  of  Egypt,  which  lasted  as  a  world- 
wonder  for  three  thousand  years ;  or  designing  that  immense  burial  chamber 
hollowed  out  of  a  single  block  of  flinty  rock,  26  feet  long  and  12  feet  wide,  which 
encompassed  him  in  the  pyramid  of  Hawara  after  a  reign  of  forty-four  years. 
This  head  is  carved  in  a  mottled  diorite  of  fine  grain.  It  was  purchased  by 
Miss  Amelia  Edwards,  and  bequeathed  by  her  to  University  College,  where 
it  now  is. 

2.  This  bust  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  is  one  of  the  most  charming  pieces  of 
sculpture  of  the  great  period  of  Thebes.     It  has  originally  been  part  of  a  group 

of  two  figures  seated  side  by  side, 
as  husband  and  wife  were  usually 
represented  at  that  time.  One 
day  I  had  the  pleasure  of  show- 
ing it  to  my  friend,  the  late 
Sir  Francis  Galton  ;  he  gazed  for 
some  time,  and  then  with  a  sigh, 
said  :  "  Ah  !  to  think  she  should 
ever  have  died !  "  For  the  sweet 
and  gracious  dignity  of  this  face 
there  is  scarcely  an  equal  after 
the  Pyramid  Age. 

Some  traces  of  inscription 
remain  on  the  back,  beginning 
with  a  Nesut  dy  Itetep  to 
Haraakhuti,  and  apparently 
naming  Hor-nez-atef,  son  of  the 
messenger  {khds)  whose  name  is 
lost.  No  such  name  is  found  in 
Lieblein,  Legrain,  or  Weigall's 
guide  to  the  Theban  tombs. 

This  bust  is  carved  in  the 
very  hard  limestone  which  was 
usual  in  the  reign  of  Amenhotep  III.  I  owe  the  cast,  and  the  photograph  on 
this  page,  to  the  kindness  of  Sir  Whitworth  Wallis  ;  he  was  informed  by  a  friend, 
who  was  moving  house,  that  he  could  have  "  two  old  stones  that  are  in  the  stable." 
This  was  one  of  them,  and  it  is  now  an  ornament  of  the  Art  Gallery  at 
Birmingham.  W.  M.  F.  P. 


30.  Lady  of  XVIIIth  dynasty.     Limestone.     Birmingham. 


4 


1.   KING    AMENEMHAT    III.     UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE. 


I 


"V 


2.     LADY    OF    XVIIITH    DYNASTY.      BIRMINGHAM. 


ANCIENT   EGYPT. 


M: 


THE  BRITISH  SCHOOL  AT  LAHUN. 

The  work  of  the  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt,  under  the  direct 
supervision  of  Prof  Petrie,  round  the  Pyramid  of  Senusert  II  at  II  Lahun  (Fayum) 
began  on  6th  January.  The  principal  object  in  view  is  the  complete  clearance  of 
the  pyramid  enclosure,  in  order  to  plan  the  various  constructions,  and  to  discover, 
if  possible,  an  entrance  into  the  burial  chambers  of  the  royal  family.  On  the 
analogy  of  other  Xllth  dynasty  pyramids,  the  entry  to  these  tombs  should  exist 
somewhere  beneath  the  space  enclosed  by  the  temenos  wall.     Originally  a  rocky 


slope  existed  here,  with  its  highest  part  to  the  north.  The  whole  site  has  been 
levelled  by  cutting  down  into  the  solid  rock,  and  by  building  up  with  chips  to  .some 
extent  on  the  south.  All  round  the  rocky  knoll  which  formed  the  core  of  the 
pyramid,  there  are  now  high  mounds  of  chips  ;  while  on  the  north  the  whole  cutting 
has  been  filled  up  again  with  sand  and  debris.  Fortunately  plenty  of  labour  is 
available,  and  at  present  some  220  men  and  boys  are  at  work.     Of  these,  23  are 


50  The  Brilish  School  at  Lahitti.    . 

Prof.  Petrie's  old  hands  from  Quft,  who  know  well  the  meaning  of  every  variation 
in  the  ground  in  which  they  are  digging,  while  the  remainder  are  villagers  from 
two  or  three  miles  away,  who  tramp  to  the  work,  with  their  hoes,  and  their  boys, 
and  their  baskets ;  they  toil  from  soon  after  sunrise  to  ten  minutes  before  sunset, 
with  an  hour's  rest  at  noon,  and  then  trudge  home  again.  They  are  mostly  poor 
folk,  and  are  glad  of  the  chance  of  earning  a  good  wage.  They  are  quite  unskilled, 
but  soon  improve  under  the  eyes  of  the  trained  Quftis,  who  are  each  one  in  charge 
of  three  "  locals." 

The  first  photograph  gives  a  good  idea  of  the  method,  extent,  and  difficulty  of 
the  work.  The  view  is  looking  east,  along  the  rock  cutting  which  bounds  the 
enclosure  on  the  north.  The  men  hoe  up  the  ground,  fill  the  baskets,  and  lift  them 
on  to  the  shoulders  of  the  boys,  who  empty  them  some  distance  away.  When  the 
pit  gets  very  deep,  a  chain  has  to  be  formed,  with  a  succession  of  lifts.  The  rock 
which  in  the  north-west  corner  is  levelled  down  to  some  20  feet  has  been  faced  with 
a  thick  brick  wall  covered  with  white  plaster. 

About  I S  feet  south  of  this  wall,  stands  a  row  of  eight  masses  of  solid  rock,  one 
of  which  can  be  seen  on  the  right  in  the  photograph.  They  are  about  30  feet  by 
45  feet,  and  the  highest  about  15  feet,  apparently  in  the  form  of  mastabas ;  no 
doubt  they  cover  the  burial  chambers  of  the  royal  family.  The  whole  corridor 
between  the  vertical  face  on  the  north  and  the  mastabas  is  now  clear  from  east  to 
west  down  to  its  rock  pavement,  and  to  walk  along  from  end  to  end  in  its  cool  and 
shady  depth  is  a  striking  experience.  Robbers  in  the  past  have  been  active  here. 
They  have  pulled  down  or  made  large  holes  in  the  brick-work,  and  have  even 
tunnelled  right  through  one  of  the  rock  masses,  in  their  apparently  fruitless  search. 


A  small  pyramid,  90  feet  square,  no  doubt  of  the  Queen,  stands  at  the  north-east 
corner  of  the  enclosure.  The  whole  of  the  surrounding  pavement  is  now  cleared, 
but  beyond  a  few  coloured  chips  of  sculpture  from  the  chapel,  and  foundation 
deposits  of  minor  interest,  nothing  has  been  found.  The  fine  white  limestone  which 
once  covered  the  rough  core  of  the  pyramid,  and  which  paved  the  enclosure,  has  almost 
completely  disappeared.     The  second  photograph  shows  the  work  on  the  north- 


The  British  School  at  Lahun. 


5' 


east  corner  here,  looking  south,  with  the  eastern  side  of  the  large  pyramid  enclosure 
in  the  distance.  This  is  better  seen  in  the  third  photograph.  The  whole  of  the 
foundations  of  the  enclosure  walls  have  been  laid  bare,  and  this  clearance  is  further 
continued  up  to  the  original  foundation  of  the  pyramid.     Very  curiously,  the  rock 


floor  has  been  cut  so  as  to  slope  gently  inward  for  40  feet,  after  which  it  rises  up 
again  towards  the  pyramid.  It  was  then  covered  over  and  levelled  up  with  clean 
sand,  and  a  layer  of  flint  pebbles  on  the  top.  This  trench  full  of  sand  seems  to  have 
been  intended  to  receive  and  absorb  any  rain  that  ran  off"  the  pyramid,  so  as  to 
prevent  the  water  soaking  into  the  foundations.  The  temple  area  was  buried 
15  to  18  feet  deep  in  chips,  but  it  has  been  completely  cleared,  and  the  rock  surface 
everywhere  examined  minutely  for  any  traces  of  hidden  entrances.  The  third 
photograph  will  give  a  good  idea  how  this  was  done,  every  crack  in  the  rock  being 
examined,  and  brushed  clean. 

Outside  the  temenos  wall  was  found  a  line  of  deep  circular  pits  filled  with  mud. 
These  have  been  traced  right  round  the  east,  south,  and  part  of  the  west  sides. 
Some  of  them  contained  roots  and  branches,  and  their  purpose  is  obvious.  A  row 
of  trees  surrounding  a  pyramid  is  quite  unknown  elsewhere,  and  we  can  easily 
imagine  what  a  pleasing  effect  they  must  have  produced, — the  shining,  white 
pyramid,  the  green  line  of  trees,  and  then  the  yellow  desert. 

Mr.  Engelbach's  work  four  miles  away  at  Harageh  has  been  very  successful, 
in  a  cemetery  which  is  mainly  of  the  Xllth  dynasty. 

Guy  Brunton. 
D  2 


52 


A  Byzantine   Table  of  Fractions. 


r 

o 


u5 

a 

< 

Z 
H- 
Z 

bl 
U 


^^y^'^ 


!^:^<_^^^ 


^^ 


■L-lXkttt 


Hl\ 


S3 


A  Byzantine  Table  of  Fractions. 


53 


o 


< 


uii/iz       Z      Z    Z      ^     Z 
h-      h     H    h      h     h 


q        Q 


^v:.<i'0<l-^S'^"5^^^^<l 


ri        (I        II      *t 
rv  X  CO  ©  o\—  2 


-o5  -'^rJ^   lO 


z    z    z    z    z    z 

h     e     I-    H     I-     H 


D   3 


(     54    ) 


A   BYZANTINE   TABLE   OF   FRACTIONS. 

This  outer  leaf  of  a  set  of  writing  tablets,  has  two  lists  of  fractions  written  in 
ink  upon  the  recessed  surface  of  the  wood.  These  lists  show  the  method  of 
compiling  multiples  of  iVth  and  ^V^h.  which  will  be  best  followed  in  the  transcription 
and  translation  facing  the  facsimile.  The  system  was  to  add  together  a  series  of 
fractions,  each  with  one  as  numerator,  so  as  to  make  up  more  complex  fractions. 
Thus  here  the  1 5th  part  of  7  is  stated  to  be  ^  +  -fV  +  irV-  ^^  can  verify  this  in 
our  way  by  saying  that  -30+^+  ^V  =  -3^  or  ■^^.  This  is  the  regular  system  of 
ancient  Egypt,  and  it  is  interesting  to  see  how  it  was  continued  on  into  Christian 
times,  while  it  is  still  familiar  to  the  modern  Copt. 

The  reading  of  the  columns  begins  with  "15"  and  "  16,"  showing  that  this  is 
part  of  a  series  of  tablets  giving  the  composition  of  various  fractions  up  to  -njths, 
which  is  the  last.  The  heading  continues:  "The  15th  part  of  one  is  -j^th,  the  15th 
part.of  2  is  I'jj  +  ■j'j,"  and  so  on  to  the  foot  of  the  tablet,  after  which  two  more 
entries  are  put  up  at  the  top  of  the  middle  part.  The  further  column  is  parted 
from  the  first  by  the  c/ii  rho  monogram.  It  reads:  "  16.  The  i6th  part  (O  E 
unexplained)  of  one  . . .  ."  doubtless  ^th  is  lost;  "of  2  =  |th;  of  3  =  Jth  +  y'^^th,"  etc. 

A  list  of  the  signs  used  for  the  fractions  is  added  to  the  transcription  here  for 
convenience. 


Outside  of  Table  of  Fractions,  "Phoibamn  Daueit." 

On  the  back  of  this  tablet,  which  was  the  outer  one  of  the  group,  is  very  roughly 
cut  "  Phoibamn  Daueit,"  probably  the  name  and  paternity  of  the  schoolboy  who 
used  it.  The  size  is  I0"6  inches  long  and  $  inches  wide,  with  three  holes  through  it 
to  tie"  the  leaves  together ;  there  are  two  smaller  holes  running  out  in  the  edge,  for 
securing  a  string  round  the  tablets  in  order  to  seal  them.  It  was  bought  in  Egypt, 
191 3,  and  is  now  in  University  College,  London. 

Herbert  Thompson. 


\ 


(     55    ) 


NOTES   ON   THE   ETHICS   OF   THE   EGYPTIANS. 

I N  our  study  of  the  civilisation  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  it  is  interesting  to  consider 
an  aspect  whicli  is  too  often  neglected.  We  are  apt  to  concentrate  our  attention 
on  the  material  side,  to  study  their  great  monuments  and  the  concrete  details  of 
their  life  as  depicted  in  the  tombs,  and  one  forgets  to  ask  what  were  these  people 
like,  as  men  ?  What  were  their  ideals,  their  estimates  of  right  and  wrong  ?  If  we 
are  liable  to  overlook  this,  in  our  study  of  archaeology  or  of  philology,  it  is  not  the 
fault  of  the  Egyptians  themselves.  In  all  their  in.scriptions,  wherever  there  are 
monuments  or  writings  to  study,  we  find  that  they  are  lavish  in  the  expression  of 
their  ethical  ideas,  though  it  is  often  only  to  make  a  boast  of  their  own  virtues  or 
their  own  position.  There  is  a  large  proportion  of  inscriptions  which  deal  with 
what  we  vaguely  call  titles.  Some  of  these  refer  to  the  rank  and  offices  of  the 
deceased,  but  they  are  interlarded  with  many  expressions  regarding  the  moral 
qualities  which  they  claimed  to  possess.  Almost  every  stele  has — "  I  gave  bread 
to  the  hungry,  water  to  the  thirsty,  and  clothes  to  the  naked." 

The  first  thing  that  we  notice  about  these  expressions  is  the  extremely  concrete 
way  in  which  they  express  themselves.  It  is  curious  that  so  ethically-minded 
a  people  should  have  had  no  word  for  "  ought."  Although  they  were  always 
boasting  of  their  virtues,  they  did  not  possess  this  word,  and  when  they  required  to 
convey  the  notion  of  duty,  they  put  it  more  literally:  "  I  did  what  men  love,  and 
what  the  gods  approve."  Approbation  from  without  seems  to  have  been  a  chief 
incentive  to  virtue. 
,      The  stock  of  words  conveying  abstract  ideas  was  extremely  limited,  and  the 

words  were  very  simple.     The  word  for  "right"  is  nia'ct  {tuilof)  —^~ — °    meaning 

right  direction,  and  derived  from  a  verb  "  to  be  straight,"  "  to  lead  straight  on." 
Thus  mdet  signifies  conformity  to  an  ethical  norm,  though  it  is  often  equally  well 
translated  as  Truth  or  Justice.  The  word  for  iniquity  is  'iesfet;  there  are  not  many 
words  for  crime.  "  Duty  "  is  generally  conveyed  by  the  phrase  'ere-t,  "  that  which 
appertains  to  a  man,"  meaning  the  obligation  which  rests  upon  him.  There  is  no 
word  for  "  will."  Conscience  is  sometimes  represented  by  'iel>  (ab)  "  heart," 
expressing  not  only  the  mere  instrument  of  cognition,  but  also  the  faculty  which 
recognises  and  suggests  the  right  course  of  action.  On  an  XVIIIth  dynasty  stele 
we  read  : — "  Thus  saith  he.  This  is  my  character  to  which  I  have  borne  witness, 
"  and  there  is  no  exaggeration  therein  ...  It  is  my  heart  ('ted)  that  caused  me  to 
"  do  it  through  its  guidance  unto  me.  It  was  an  excellent  prompter  unto  me ; 
"  I  did  not  infringe  its  commands  ;  I  feared  to  transgress  its  guidance.  Therefore 
"  I  prosf>ered  exceedingly,  and  was  fortunate  on  account  of  that  which  it  caused  me 
"  to  do ;  I  succeeded  by  reason  of  its  guidance.  Of  a  sooth,  true  is  that  which  is 
"  said  by  men  :  '  It  (the  heart)  is  the  voice  of  God  that  is  in  everybody  ;  happy  is 
"  he  whom  it  has  led  to  a  good  course  of  action  !' "  Beyond  a  few  similar  passages 
there  is  not  much  which  refers  to  any  ethical  concept,  and  it  seems  as  though  the 
ethical  thought  of  the  Egyptians  never  attained  any  very  high  level. 

The  Elgyptians  were  not  philosophers,  and  they  were  unable  to  account  in  any 
philosophical  manner  for  their  rules  of  conduct.     They  seem  to  have  possessed  no 

D  4 


56  Notes  on  the  Ethics  of  the  Egyptians. 

words  for  "  motive,"  "  responsibility,"  or  "  scruple."  They  apparently  never  wrestled 
over  the  difficulties  of  opposing  lines  of  conduct ;  their  minds  were  not  torn  by 
moral  struggles.  It  was  recognised  that  some  things  were  intrinsically  good,  and 
others  bad,  but  we  never  find  anything  but  the  crudest  lines  of  division  ;  it  is  never 
implied  that  such  and  such  conduct  may  be  good  in  one  person  or  instance,  and 
bad  in  another.  In  ancient  Egypt,  the  philosophic  level  was  not  reached  ;  it  was 
only  so  in  the  regions  of  the  Mediterranean  area,  from  the  time  when  Greek 
influences  began  to  prevail. 

It  has  been  already  noticed  in  how  very  concrete  a  manner  the  Egyptians 
expressed  various  moral  predicates.  Whenever  they  could  do  so,  they  visualised 
an  action,  and  reduced  the  expression  of  it  to  its  simplest  terms.  For  instance,  to 
express  what  we  mean  by  "  reserved  "  or  "  discreet,"  they  formed  a  simple  compound, 
flap  ro,  "  hidden  of  mouth,"  and  to  express  "  kindly  "  or  "  indulgent,"  they  said 
wah  'ieb,  "enduring  of  heart."  Almost  all  their  descriptive  phrases  were  formed  in 
this  kind  of  way  ;  the  words  consist,  for  the  most  part,  of  adjectives  or  participles, 
which  describe  a  condition  that  can  be  visualised,  and  they  figure  a  limb  or  part  of 
the  body  in  which  the  quality  to  be  named  exhibits  itself  'Ieb  is  used  to  denote 
conditions  of  mind  and  temperament,  ro  for  anything  manifested  by  the  mouth, 
hor  {her)  for  things  of  the  face,  as  in  spad  /tor,  "sharp  of  face,"  meaning  "  intelligent," 
"  clever,"  'a,  arm,  for  action,  as  in  'aw  'a,  "extended  of  hand,"  meaning  generous  or 
liberal ;  and  the  use  of  these  excessively  concrete  images  to  denote  abstract  qualities 
makes  it  extremely  difficult  to  translate  Egyptian  te.xts  with  any  certainty  of 
accuracy. 

The  ancient  Egyptians  appear  to  have  had  a  strong  belief  in  fate,  and  they 
imagined  that  fate,  shay,  governed  all  the  events  of  life.  They  did  not,  however, 
hold  the  belief  that  men's  actions  were  determined  beforehand.  Men  were 
hampered  by  predestined  occurrences  but  were  free  in  their  own  individual  actions, 
and  free  from  the  tyranny  of  Kismet  which  paralyses  the  Egyptians  of  to-day.  The 
Egyptian  moralists  never  reached  the  loftiest  planes  of  ethics.  It  does  not  appear 
that  they  realised  that  virtue  is  its  own  reward,  but  all  their  teaching  was  on  a  lower 
plane.  In  the  maxims  of  Ptah-hetep,  belonging  to  the  Old  Kingdom  period,  we 
read  : — "  Excellent  is  right,  and  endureth  and  prevaileth,"  but  prudential  considera- 
tions follow — "  Never  has  wickedness  brought  its  venture  safe  to  port ;  wrong-doing 
stealeth  away  riches."  It  seems  as  though  virtue  was  not  inculcated  for  its  own 
sake,  but  recommended  for  practice  merely  with  a  view  to  the  reward  that  it  might 
bring. 

Perhaps  the  highest  standpoint,  in  this  regard,  to  which  the  Egyptians  attained, 
was  in  the  desire  to  raise  up  a  good  name,  but  with  this  there  was  naively  blended 
the  intense  desire  for  approval,  and  the  over-anxiety  to  stand  well  with  others. 
He  required  to  be  in  favour  with  the  Pharaoh,  and  to  describe  himself  as  "  beloved 
of  his  master,"  or  as  one  "  with  whose  excellence  the  lord  of  the  two  lands  was 
content,"  but  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  popular  verdict  was  also  held  in  high 
account.  Pharaoh  was  considered  to  be  the  patron  and  therecompenserof  virtue — 
"  the  Lord  of  Right,"  and  an  official  relates — "  I  did  right  for  the  Lord  of  Right 
for  I  knew  he  is  pleased  at  it";  yet  in  spite  of  the  absolute  form  of  the  government 
under  the  Pharaohs,  the  approval  of  fellow-men,  and  public  opinion  in  general  was 
held  in  esteem. 

Virtue  was  considered  to  reap  its  reward  on  earth.  A  man  ends  a  long 
catalogue  of  his  own  good  qualities  with  an  address  to  mankind  :  "  I  speak  to  you, 
"  O  mortals ;  listen  and  do  the  good  deeds  that  I  have  done,  and  to  you  shall  be 


Notes  on  the  Ethics  of  the  Egyptians.  57 

"  done  the  like."  To  a  king,  it  is  said  :  "  Do  the  right  that  thou  mayest  live  long 
in  the  land."  Sometimes  this  idea  is  expressed  more  theologically :  "  God  returns 
evil  to  him  who  does  it,  and  right  to  him  who  brings  it."  The  fear  of  God  is  also 
found  to  be  an  incentive  to  good  conduct. 

The  Egyptians  were  of  course  aware  that  it  is  not  always  the  worthy  who  reap 
rewards,  they  noted  the  fact  that  the  unworthy  sometimes  prosper  through  no  merit 
of  their  own,  but  they  regarded  this  as  accidental.  The  predominance  of  wrong 
became  the  theme  of  a  class  of  pessimistic  writings,  which  deal  with  the  evil 
conditions  prevailing  in  certain  periods.  A  papyrus  preserved  at  Leyden  describes 
the  deadlock  of  social  conditions — how  "  slaves  have  usurped  the  place  of  the  rich, 
murder  and  rapine  prevail,  and  the  righteous  dwell  alone  and  in  misery."  One 
author  draws  the  conclusion  that  life  is  not  worth  living,  another  cites  as  the  cause, 
the  impiety  of  mankind  and  the  callousness  of  their  ruler.  The  crowning  passage 
in  this  literature  consists  in  admonitions  to  the  Pharaoh  to  perform  various  religious 
duties  incumbent  upon  kings,  in  the  hope  of  their  leading  to  happier  conditions  in 
the  state  of  the  country. 

With  regard  to  the  life  after  death,  there  was  a  gradual  growth  of  belief  that 
virtue  would  reap  its  reward  in  that  life  to  come.  In  the  early  time  (Old  Kingdom), 
more  primitive  beliefs  in  certain  rites  and  formulae  held  ground  ;  in  the  literature 
of  the  Pyramid  times,  it  is  the  magical  element  which  is  to  the  fore ;  indeed  the 
whole  trend  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  towards  the  profession  of  certain  actions  and 
the  reading  of  certain  formulae,  and  even  the  fact  of  their  being  written  on  the  tomb 
had  efficacy  in  the  gaining  of  happiness  hereafter.  It  must  be  admitted,  however, 
that  certain  passages  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  imply  that  righteousness  would  have  its 
influence  in  determining  the  future  life  of  man,  and  that  the  magic  formulae  were 
not  the  sole  passport. 

It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  change  to  the  later  and  more  ethical  view  takes 
its  rise,  and  the  gradual  transition  comes  about,  but  it  is  to  be  found  in  the 
professions  of  virtues  which  are  engraved  on  the  funeral  stele.s.  The  deceased  begs 
an  oflering  at  his  tomb,  because  of  his  good  actions  :  "  I  have  been  virtuous,  I  have 
given  bread  to  the  hungry,"  etc.,  and  this  commemoration  of  virtues  was  one  of 
the  contributory  causes  which  led  up  to  the  doctrine  that  virtue  in  this  life  would 
bring  happiness  in  the  life  hereafter. 

Then  again,  on  these  same  steles  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  it  is  often  found  that 
the  deceased  uses  the  name  of  one  of  the  gods  to  threaten  the  evil-doer  who  dares 
to  violate  the  tomb.  The  mention  of  judgment  "  in  the  place  where  judgment  is 
given,"  suggests  to  us  the  conception  of  a  deity  who  is  the  champion  of  the  virtuous 
dead.  Breasted  shows  that  Re,  the  Sun-god,  held  this  position  at  a  very  early 
period,  and  then  that  solar  beliefs  were  early  overlaid  by  the  Osirian  beliefs,  and 
in  the  later  times  this  cult  was  pre-eminent  and  Osiris  regarded  as  the  rewarder  of 
virtue  and  punisher  of  guilt. 

One  of  the  most  famous  chapters  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (Chapter  CXXV) 
contains  the  Negative  Confession.  The  illustration  which  usually  accompanies 
this  is  a  vignette  (see  p.  27)  representing  Osiris  seated  on  a  dais,  with  the  scales 
before  him.  The  ibis-headed  Thoth  stands  near,  to  record,  and  the  heart  of  the 
deceased  is  weighed  in  the  balance  against  the  feather  of  truth  (Maot).  The  forty- 
two  assessors,  seated  above,  are  separately  invoked  in  the  repudiation  of  sins.  In 
the  two  versions  that  have  come  down  to  us,  we  find  denials  that  various  forms  of 
wrong  have  been  committed,  and  we  find  the  mention  of  demons  as  among  those 
who   punish   such   sins.     After   a   preliminary    invocation,    the    elder    confession 


S8  Notes  on  the  Ethics  of  the  Egyptians. 

begins : — "  I  have  done  no  wickedness  to  men.  I  have  not  brought  misery  upon 
"  my  fellows.  I  have  not  wrought  injuries  in  the  place  of  right.  I  have  not  done 
"  mischief.  I  have  not  made  the  beginning  of  every  day  laborious  in  the  sight  of 
"  him  who  worked  for  me  ...  .  I  have  not  impoverished  the  poor  ....  I  have 
"  not  caused  hunger.  I  have  not  caused  weeping.  I  have  not  .slain.  I  have  not 
"  commanded  to  slay.  I  have  not  made  everyone  suffer.  I  have  not  decreased  the 
"  meals  in  the  temples.  I  have  not  diminished  the  loaves  of  the  gods  .... 
"  I  have  not  added  to,  or  taken  from,  the  corn-measure.  I  have  not  diminished 
"  the  palm  (unit  of  measurement).  I  have  not  falsified  the  cubit  of  the  fields. 
"  I  have  not  added  to  the  weights  of  the  scales.  I  have  not  tampered  with  the 
"  plummet  of  the  balance.  I  have  not  taken  away  the  milk  from  the  mouth  of  the 
"  child  ....  I  have  not  snared  the  birds  (bones  of  the  gods)  \sic.;  quite  obscure] 
"  .  .  .  .  I  have  not  dammed  running  water  ....  I  have  not  neglected  the  feast- 
"  days,  in  respect  of  their  sacrificial  joints  ....  I  have  not  hindered  the  god  in 
"  his  goings  forth  "  (processions).  "  I  am  pure  !  I  am  pure !  I  am  pure  !  I  am  pure!" 
The  later  confession,  added  to  it,  has  much  the  same  tone,  each  denial  being  joined 
to  the  name  of  a  demon  : — "  O  fire-embracer,  I  have  not  robbed,"  etc. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  Negative  Confession,  its  importance  has  been  much 
exaggerated.  It  is  not  a  canonical  list  of  vices  or  acts  of  wickedness ;  the  many 
variants  of  the  MSS.  are  enough  to  prove  that  no  great  stress  was  laid  on  precise 
cataloguing  of  the  denials,  but  that  they  were  rather  chosen  at  random,  and  the 
list,  if  fairly  complete,  was  carelessly  compiled.  The  deceased  was  finally  supposed 
to  be  innocent  of  all  crime,  and  therefore  worthy  of  acquittal  in  the  presence  of 
Osiris.  Magic,  in  the  long  run,  encroached  upon  the  higher  and  more  ethical  view 
of  things,  for  no  doubt  the  chapter  was  employed  as  magical,  and  its  words  had 
a  magical  potency,  when  written  out  and  deposited  with  the  deceased.  They  were 
used  as  a  means  of  conveying  to  him  the  assurance  of  happiness  in  the  life 
hereafter. 

It  would  take  long  to  discuss  in  detail  the  whole  catalogue  of  moral  qualities, 
but,  in  conclusion,  a  short  summary  of  the  Egyptian  character,  from  the  sources  at 
our  disposal,  may  not  be  out  of  place. 

The  ancient  Egyptians  were  a  gay  and  light-hearted  people,  luxurious  in  their 
lives,  and  prone  to  self-indulgence.  They  were  kind,  however,  charitable,  and 
courteous  in  their  behaviour,  and  there  are  no  evidences  of  barbarous  savagery  and 
cruelties,  such  as  were  practised  by  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians.  Honesty  and 
incorruptibility  were  not  among  the  strong  points  of  the  Egyptians,  but  in  this 
respect  they  were  at  least  able  to  perceive  the  ideal  standard,  if  they  did  not  attain 
to  it.  Intellectually  they  were  gifted,  though  not  deep,  and  they  were  averse  to 
dull  brooding ;  but  their  love  of  all  that  is  artistic  and  pleasurable  in  life,  is  perhaps 
the  characteristic  which  has  played  the  largest  part  in  helping  to  endear  them  to 
their  modern  votaries. 

[These  notes  were  made  on  an  address  given  by  Dr.  Alan  H.  Gardiner  on 
27  November,  at  the  London  centre,  E.R.S.A. — HlLDA  FLINDERS  Petrie.] 


(  59  ) 


THE  LATE  PROFESSOR  TSUBOI  AND  EGYPTOLOGY  IN  JAPAN. 

It  was  some  thirty  or  forty  years  ago  that  archaeology  began  to  be  studied  in 
Japan  as  a  science.  It  is  quite  natural  that  Egyptology,  which  has  no  direct 
relation  to  the  civilisation  of  Japan,  has  not  been  so  much  valued  there  as  in 
Europe,  and  that  its  study  has  been  restricted  within  a  narrow  circle  of  people. 
No  doubt  the  study  of  the  ancient  history  of  Egypt  has  done  a  good  deal  for  the 
popularisation  of  Egyptian  antiquities  among  the  Japanese.  The  late  Prof.  S. 
Tsuboi  of  the  Tokyo  Imperial  University  was  the  first  to  study  Egyptology 
proper. 

Prof  Tsuboi  specialised  in  anthropology,  while  at  the  same  time  he  had 
a  deep  interest  in  archaeology.  After  studying  in  England,  France,  and  other 
continental  countries,  he  lectured  on  anthropology  as  well  as  on  archaeology  in  the 
Imperial  University  of  Tokyo.  Egyptology,  however,  seems  to  have  been  one  of 
his  favourite  subjects.  He  frequently  gave  lectures  on  Egyptology  in  the  High 
Normal  School  and  at  various  public  meetings. 

Thus,  through  him,  many  strange  antiquities,  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the 
Nile  Valley,  became  gradually  known  to  the  learned  circle  of  the  Japanese,  and  the 
terms,  for  instance,  inastaba,  canopic-jar  or  iisfiabti  have  become  quite  familiar  among 
them.  When  he  first  came  to  Europe,  he  had  hardly  enough  time  to  devote 
himself  to  the  study  of  Egyptian  antiquities  ;  but  two  years  before  his  death,  when 
travelling  in  Europe,  he  went  to  Cairo  and  studied  the  museum  very  carefully,  and 
brought  back  to  Japan  some  perfect  models  of  funeral  boats  and  other  relics  of  the 
ancient  Egyptians. 

Learned  society  in  Japan  expected  from  him  a  satisfactory  result  of  his  study 
on  Egyptology,  but  in  191 3,  while  attending  the  International  Congress  of  Royal 
Academies  in  Moscow,  he  suddenly  died  without  having  had  time  to  publish  the 
result  of  his  studies.  His  untimely  death  was  a  great  shock  and  a  severe  loss  to 
Japan. 

The  Kyoto  Imperial  University,  though  much  younger  than  the  Tokyo 
University,  has  been  closely  connected  with  Egyptology  from  the  time  of  its 
foundation.  It  has  a  special  building  for  archaeological  collections,  joined  the 
'Egypt  E.xploration  Fund,  and  has  now  joined  the  British  School  of  Archaeology 
in  Egypt.  Since  its  foundation,  the  University  has  been  collecting  numerous 
antiquities  from  Egypt,  and  now  we  can  see  there  stone  implements  and  pottery  of 
the  Pre-dynastic  age  and  various  objects  of  the  Dynastic  periods.  Of  all  these 
collections,  those  found  at  Deir  el-Bahri  occupy  the  greater  part.  This  collection 
may  be  said  to  be  the  largest  one  in  Japan,  though  certainly  small  as  compared 
with  many  of  those  in  Europe.  In  this  University,  lectures  on  Egyptology  have 
been  given  by  K.  Hamada,  one  of  the  late  Prof.  Tsuboi's  pupils. 

Besides  the  collections  in  the  Kyoto  University,  there  is  also  a  good 
collection  of  Egyptian  antiquities  in  the  Tokyo  University,  gathered  by  the  late 
Prof.  Tsuboi.  This  collection  contains  stone  implements  of  the  Pre-dynastic  age, 
fragments  of  sculpture,  mummies  and  funeral  boats.  In  the  College  of  Medicine 
there  is  a  perfect  mummy,  and  in  the  College  of  Literature  some  collection  of 
antiquities. 


6o  Tlu  Late  Professor  Tsuboi  and  Egyptology  in  Japan. 

Mr.  Murakawa,  Professor  of  the  Ancient  History  of  Europe,  is  also  a  student  of 
Egyptology  and  often  refers  to  it  in  his  lectures. 

Outside  these  two  Imperial  Universities,  there  is  a  good  number  of  Egyptian 
antiquities  in  the  Tokyo  Imperial  Household  Museum,  where  mummies,  ushabtiu, 
and  other  objects  presented  by  the  Cairo  Museum,  attract  the  eyes  of  visitors  as  do 
those  in  the  British  Museum.  The  fragments  of  the  Greek  vases  found  at 
Naukratis  may  be  seen  in  this  Museum  and  Kyoto  University  as  well. 

Now-a-days  the  general  interest  in  Egyptian  antiquities  is  increasing  among 
private  persons  in  Japan.  This  is  not  at  all  surprising  when  we  think  of  the  same 
tendency  even  in  China.  The  late  Tang-Fun,  once  the  governor  of  the  province 
Chi-li,  was  a  great  collector  of  old  Chinese  things  and  also  of  some  ancient  Egyptian 
things. 

On  the  whole,  in  Japan,  there  is  hardly  any  specialist  in  Egyptology  as  yet, 
and  the  study  of  this  subject  is  still  in  its  infancy.  But  there  are  certainly  more 
students  of  Egyptology  than  of  Assyriology. 

The  study  of  Egyptology,  besides  its  own  importance,  has  still  more  interesting 
relation  with  the  study  of  the  ancient  graves  and  funeral  customs  in  China.  It  is 
a  most  striking  phenomenon  to  notice  the  similarities  and  coincidences  between 
Egyptian  funeral  customs  and  those  of  China  in  the  Han  and  Tang  dynasties. 
The  advanced  methods  of  study  in  Egyptology  will  promote  the  studies  of 
archaeology  in  Japan  and  other  countries  in  the  Far  East. 

K.  Hamada  and  T.  Chiba. 


(    6i     ) 


THE    EARLIEST    INSCRIPTIONS. 

The  earliest  known' hieroglyphs  and  phrases  are  those  on  the  primitive  cylinders 
of  stone,  which  are  rarely  found,  and  only  in  a  few  localities.  Strange  to  say  they 
have  not  yet  been  studied  in  any  way,  and  are  scarcely  recognised  as  forming 
a  distinct  class  of  material  on  the  early  language  and  civilisation.  Perhaps  the 
main  cause  of  this  neglect  is  the  rarity  of  them,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  from  the 
purely  linguistic  point  of  view  they  are  scarcely  intelligible.  It  is  not  till  a  large 
number  can  be  compared,  and  classes  of  them  separated  into  definite  types,  that 
enough  examples  can  be  contrasted  to  see  what  is  accidental  and  what  is  systematic 
in  their  arrangement. 

In  beginning  the  catalogue  of  the  cylinders  and  scarabs  at  University  College, 
I  needed  some  classification  of  these  early  cylinders.  Before  a  conclusive 
publication,  it  seems  best  to  give  a  statement  of  the  principal  results  reached,  in 
order  that  some  criticisms  of  them  may  be  forthcoming  before  a  final  treatment. 
The  copies  here  are  only  hand-drawn,  sufficient  for  general  study  ;  but  in  the 
complete  catalogue  each  cylinder  will  be  published  in  photograph  from  a  flat  cast. 

The  greater  part  of  the  known  examples  are  at  University  College ;  a  large 
group  was  bought  some  quarter  of  a  century  ago  by  Rev.  Greville  Chester,  probably 
from  the  looting  of  a  single  cemetery ;  from  him  they  were  acquired  by  Miss  Edwards, 
and  bequeathed  with  her  collection  to  University  College  in  1892.  I  have  bought 
a  large  number,  all  the  examples  that  I  could  in  Egypt.     Thus  there  are  now  of — 

University  College,  London         ...         ...         ...  69 

MacGregor  Collection       ...         ...         ...         ...  26 

Naga  ed-Der,  Reisner       ...         ...         ...         ...  17 

All  others 19 

131 

Of  these  the  Rev.  Wm.  MacGregor  most  kindly  lent  me  his  examples,  and  I  have 
made  flat  casts  of  them  all,  from  which  these  drawings  are  taken.  Those  published 
by  Dr.  Reisner  are  in  hand  copies,  with  three  photographs  of  each  cylinder  in  the 
round.  I  have  used  the  hand  copies  as  skeletons,  and  drawn  the  signs  in  facsimile 
from  the  photographs.  Hence  there  are  only  19  which  are  not  drawn  directly  for 
the  present  study,  and  some  of  those  are  facsimiles  of  my  own,  others  are  from 
Prof  Newberry's  Scarabs.  Our  material  therefore  is  nearly  all  safe  enough  to  draw 
some  conclusions.  To  save  returning  to  this  subject  again,  it  may  be  added  that 
the  drawings  used  here  from  each  source  are  as  follows : — University  College,  Nos. 
3,  4,  13-16,  18-20,  23,  25,  26,  28,  32-34,  36-38,  42,  44-50;  MacGregor  Collection, 
I,  5,  6-9,  21,  22,  27,  40,  43,  54,  57-60,  69,  72  ;  Naga  ed-Der,  2,  12,  17,  29,  30,  31, 
39,  61-64,  66;  Various,  10,  ii,  24,  35,  41,  53,  65,  71.  Altogether  72  are  here 
studied  (three  of  them  repeated),  the  remainder  being  partly  figure  subjects,  partly 
with  signs  which  cannot  be  identified. 

After  the  photographs  were  all  collected,  I  tried  to  gain  what  help  I  could  by 
submitting  them  to  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  on  the  early  language.  Such  as 
were  similar  to  the  Royal  Tombs  sealings,  were  commented  on,  but  the  greater 


62  The  Earliest  Inscriptiotts. 

part  were  passed  over  as  pre-historic,  and  therefore  insoluble.  It  was  evident  that 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  language  alone  very  little  could  be  done.  Some  fresh 
handling  of  the  whole  subject  was  needed,  to  make  a  start  and  break  ground.  It 
required  treating  as  an  entirely  unknown  language  to  begin  with,  and  resolving  by 
comparison  of  formulae  and  .study  of  the  structure,  before  looking  to  the  language 
for  clues.  After  that  the  earliest  forms  of  the  language  may  be  compared  with  the 
sentences  thus  separated,  and  some  idea  be  gained  of  the  general  meaning.  I  am 
obliged  to  Miss  Murray  and  Dr.  Walker  for  some  suggestions.  Any  attempt  at 
present  must  be  merely  a  beginning,  in  order  to  open  up  a  more  scientific  study  of 
the  subject. 

These  cylinders  are  mostly  older  than  the  sealings  found  in  the  Royal  Tombs 
of  the  1st  dynasty;  and  the  207  sealings  which  I  drew  from  there  are  of  very  little 
help  here,  because  those  were  sealings  of  royal  domains,  while  these  are  mostly 
funerary  or  religious. 

The  only  basis  we  have  for  the  language  of  the  cylinders  is  the  far  later  body 
of  the  Pyramid  Texts.  According  to  the  Egyptians'  own  chronology,  the  cylinders 
are  about  thirteen  centuries  before  the  Pyramid  Texts,  which  are  in  turn  only  seven 
centuries  before  the  Xllth  dynasty.  Even  on  the  arbitrarily  shortened  chronology, 
the  cylinders  are  as  far  removed  from  the  Pyramid  Te.xts  as  the  latter  are  from  the 
Middle  Kingdom.  Beside  this  long  interval,  we  must  remember  that  the  changes 
in  the  writing  and  language  would  naturally  be  much  greater  while  the  growth  and 
formation  of  a  system  was  in  progress,  than  they  would  be  after  a  large  body  of 
texts  had  been  standardised,  and  a  great  bureaucracy  had  arisen.  It  is  therefore  to 
be  expected  that  the  whole  grammar,  usages  of  writing,  and  words  should  differ  far 
more  from  the  Pyramid  Texts,  than  those  do  from  the  system  of  the  Xllth  dynasty. 
As  we  find  many  orthographic  usages  are  strange  to  us  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  so 
we  must  expect  to  find  a  much  larger  proportion  of  unexpected  features  in  the 
cylinders.  The  use  of  a  root  in  different  parts  of  speech  may  have  been  very 
different  in  the  earliest  stages  of  writing,  from  what  we  find  usual  in  the  formalised 
language.  The  regular  canons  which  are  looked  on  by  us  as  normal  to  the  writing 
and  language  may  have  been  widely  divergent  in  the  primitive  and  tentative  stages, 
when  each  man  used  signs  in  his  own  fashion,  and  no  system  was  yet  generally 
developed.  None  of  the  later  canons  can  be  used  as  implicit  guides ;  we  need  to 
verify  them  each  by  some  clear  instances  of  the  primitive  age,  before  we  can  use 
them  decisively  to  settle  a  reading.  Also  we  must  remember  how  often  a  word 
lingers  long  in  popular  use  before  being  consecrated  to  literature.  The  phrase 
"  too-too  "  in  modern  English,  has  only  just  reached  the  most  evanescent  writing  ; 
yet  Cromwell  used  it  in  a  letter  and  a  Parliamentary  speech  two  hundred  and  fifty 
years  before  (speech,  Jan.  22,  1655  I  letter  of  July  27,  1657).  So  in  Egyptian  there 
might  be  words  and  constructions  used  in  the  earliest  stages,  which  did  not  become 
part  of  the  literary  system  ;  but  which,  preserved  in  popular  use,  were  at  last  brought 
into  literature  in  later  times.  Hence  the  absence  of  a  word  in  early  literature  is  no 
proof  that  it  might  not  be  used  before  the  literature  formed  its  canons. 

,  All  of  these  considerations  need  to  be  pointed  out,  as  the  usual  laws  cannot  be 
applied  to  such  early  attempts  at  writing.  We  cannot  apply  the  rules  of  the  game 
before  they  existed.  Much  greater  uncertainty  must  of  course  accompany  a  greater 
latitude :  and  until  there  is  enough  material  to  define  the  system  of  the  time,  we 
cannot  hope  to  treat  the  cylinder  inscriptions  except  by  a  series  of  guesses,  which 
often  leave  alternative  solutions  equally  possible.  The  immense  importance, 
however,  of  getting  some  view  of  the  oldest  stages  of  the  writing  and  language. 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions.  63 

makes  it  imperative  to  try  to  solve  this  material,  and  not  to  leave  it  neglected  as  at 
present. 

In  order  to  examine  the  material  clearly,  it  is  here  divided  into  eight  classes  : — 

I.  Seated  figures. 
-  2.  Adk/iu  birds. 

™  3.  Religious  formulae. 

4.  Theth  formulae. 

5.  Tet  formulae. 

6.  Phrases. 

7.  Titles. 

8.  Early  dynastic. 

Seated  Figures,  i-ii. 

These  seated  figures  have  in  all  examples  (except  No.  2)  a  table  of  ofterings 
before  each,  and  usually  one  or  two  loaves  on  the  table.  The  figure  (except  in  2) 
has  one  hand  lifted  over  the  offerings  to  accept  them.  It  always  has  very  long 
hair,  often  hanging  down  below  the  seat.  The  seat  is  fully  shown  in  some  examples, 
such  as  No.  6.  The  type  of  couch  used  in  dynasties  o  and  i  is  well  outlined  ;  it 
has  the  poles  with  expanded  ends,  the  cross  bars,  and  the  short  legs.  For  scattered 
examples  of  such  figures,  entered  in  other  classes,  see  Nos.  12,  33,  36,  37,  38,  39,  41, 
42,  43,  44,  61,  63,  64.  Thus  a  third  of  all  intelligible  cylinders  have  this  figure  and 
table  of  offerings.  It  seems  impossible  to  dissociate  this  from  the  universal  type  of 
early  stele,  with  the  deceased  seated,  extending  a  hand  over  his  table  of  offerings  ; 
for  an  early  example  see  the  stele  of  Heknen  {Meduni,  xvi).  It  appears  then  that 
these  must  be  the  earlier  equivalent  of  the  sepulchral  stele,  that  which  was  to 
ensure  future  felicity  to  the  deceased.  It  does  not  seem  likely  that  such  a  design 
would  be  used  as  a  seal  by  the  living  person,  and  no  clay  impressions  of  such  seals 
are  known. 

No.  I  has  a  different  type  of  figure,  with  the  second  arm  shown,  no  hair,  and 
a  table  with  upright  loaves  (?).  The  inscription  seems  to  read  Ah  ne  Neit,  "  Rejoice 
in  Neit,"  which  may  be  a  personal  name,  or  less  probably  a  pious  wish  for  the  dead. 
Neit  is  written  with  the  crossed  arrows,  but  very  roughly  drawn.  (See  Royal 
Tombs,  I,  V.) 

No.  2  is  a  gold  foil  cylinder,  the  only  such  known  (Naga  ed-Der).  It  is  very 
simple,  reading  Neit  men  s,  men  s  Neit  "  Neit  establishes  her,  establish  her  O  Neit." 
The  donkey's  head  is  probably  a  word  sign  for  the  personal  name. 

No.  3  begins  with  the  sign  of  Neit,  see  the  stele  of  Merneit  {Rojal  Tombs,  I,  i) 
followed  by  sen-sent.  This  word  often  recurs,  sometimes  sen  alone,  sometimes 
duplicated  as  sen-sen.  The  root  meaning  is  sen  "  brother."  Yet  as  it  is  not  likely 
that  the  dead  would  be  called  a  brother  of  a  god,  we  must  look  to  a  derived 
meaning.  Sen-sen  is  used  for  "  to  be  united  "  or  "  associated  " ;  and,  still  further 
derived,  sen  sometimes  is  used  for  equality  or  conformity.  We  may  perhaps  best 
take  sen  as  assimilated  or  conformed  to  a  god,  and  sensen  as  united  to  the  god  in 
a  stronger  sen.se. 

No.  4  introduces  the  pool  sign  ba,  familiar  in  the  1st  dynasty  in  the  name  of 
King  Merpaba  (Royal  Tombs,  I,  vi,  x.xvi).  As  we  shall  see  later,  this  occurs  as 
the  name  of  a  deity  (23).  Here  it  is  joined  with  hd  "  to  be  behind,"  to  protect, 
or  "  back  "  a  person.  It  may  read  "  Behind  is  Ba,  behind  her."  Ba  may  be  the 
Ram-god  Ba,  who  is  "  over  the  gods,"  or  Ba  lord  of  Daddu  (Osiris),  as  a  ram. 

No.  5.  The  latter  conclusion  is  the  more  likely,  as  the  ram   Ba  represents 


V 


64  Tlu  Earliest  Inscriptions. 

Osiris  lord  of  Daddu  on  this  cylinder,  reading  "conformed  to  Onz  Ba,"  Onz  being 
the  name  of  Osiris  at  Heb  (Bchbet)  in  the  Delta.  This  place  is  only  i6  miles 
from  Daddu  (Tmei  el-Amdid). 

No.  6.  Here  a  fresh  form  of  devotion  is  given,  by  kitet  "  to  follow."  It  appears 
to  read  "  Follower  of  Neit,  follower  of  Hathor  (?),  Zeded."  The  animal  seems  to  be 
different  to  the  Ba,  with  wide-spread  horns,  and  the  twig  renp  between  them  ;  it 
may  be  a  form  of  the  Hathor  cow,  or  rather  a  cow  worship  not  yet  identified  with 
Hathor.  The  name  Zeded,  a  cake,  has  the  determinative  of  a  turn-over  cake 
following  it ;  such  a  name  is  parallel  to  tti,  bread  loaf,  which  is  a  common  name, 
alone  or  with  additions. 

No.  7  is  like  4,  an  appeal  to  the  protection  of  the  god.  "  Neit  is  behind  " ;  it 
may  be  a  personal  name.  The  golden-headed  vulture  ci,  appears  here  to  be  the 
phonetic  complement  of  M. 

No.  8  is  a  symmetrical  arrangement  of  the  title  /ten,  priest,  twice  repeated,  with 
the  names  of  the  goddesses  Neit  and  Uazet.  That  the  serpent  alone,  in  this  form, 
was  used  for  the  goddess  Uazet  is  shown  by  the  reading  of  the  serpent  of  the 
tenth  nome  of  Upper  Egypt,  discussed  in  the  report  of  the  Recueil  in  our 
previous  number. 

No.  9.  The  plant  sign  here  is  read  uaz  by  Dr.  Sethe.  The  reading  seems  to 
be  Se  uas  s  Uazet,  "  Uazet  causes  her  to  flourish."  After  that  there  is  no  evident 
reading  :  possibly  we  might  read  set  the  body  or  being,  flourishes  because  of  Neit. 

No.  10  reads  "  United  to  Uazet,"  but  here  sent  is  thrice  repeated.  Probably 
there  are  instances  of  senseless  repetition  to  fill  up  a  space  on  cylinders,  and  this 
may  be  such  ;  or  even  a  repetition  may  be  intentional  to  re-enforce  the  sense,  in 
a  manner  which  was  disused  as  writing  became  formalised. 

No.  II  does  not  yield  any  evident  reading.  Both  10  and  11  are  notable  for 
introducing  a  bird  behind  the  seated  figure;  this  bird  can  hardly  be  dissociated 
from  the  next  group. 

It  will  be  seen  how  funereal  cylinders  of  this  class  never  contain  any  titles, 
but  solely  declarations  of  unity  or  conformity  with  the  gods,  or  else  prayers  for 
protection.  This  agrees  well  with  the  purport  suggested  by  the  resemblance  to  the 
stele,  of  benefit  and  safety  in  the  future  life.  Only  one  office  is  named,  and  that 
is  a  priesthood,  which  ensured  divine  protection. 

AAkhu  Birds. 

The  next  class  of  cylinders  has  a  bird  in  each  inscription.  From  always 
having  two  legs,  this  figure  must  be  intended  for  a  bird,  although  the  head  may 
seem  more  like  a  quadruped  with  horns.  In  three  instances  we  find  this  bird  on 
the  same  cylinder  as  a  seated  figure,  Nos.  10,  11,  12.  In  two  it  succeeds  the 
figure,  in  one  it  precedes  it.  It  appears  to  be  thus  in  the  same  relation  to  the  rest 
of  the  inscription  as  the  seated  figure.  It  is  parallel  to  the  position  in  which  the 
ailkhu  bird  is  seen,  along  with  personal  names,  on  the  steles  of  the  1st  dynasty. 
On  those  steles  there  are  nineteen  instances  where  the  bird  has  the  ka  arms  over  it 
in  protection,  all  belonging  to  the  latter  half  of  the  1st  dynasty  {Royal  Tombs, 
I,  xxxi,  xxxxii;  II,  x.xvii).  The  only  earlier  example  has  the  bird  alone 
{Royal  Tombs,  I,  xxvi,  70).  This  indicates  that  the  bird  alone  is  the  earlier  form, 
before  being  combined  with  the  ka  arms.  On  the  steles  there  is  no  instance  of  the 
bird  turning  the  head  back,  which  is  always  the  case  on  the  cylinders.  Thus  it 
seems  that  the  cylinders  belong  to  a  time  when  the  usages  that  we  see  in  the 
1st  dynasty  were  not  yet  settled.     On  the  later  steles  the  bird  always  precedes  the 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions.  65 

NAME        ANALYSIS  INSCRIPTION 


&/:£ 


UNITED    WITH  ME  IT 
"ft-     ''/. 


^"(■'/kF^^^ 


/wv^n  5 


'> 


n /s/xA^^o 


'Vj*'* 


IT 


fKltST  OF  0A2ET,  PRIEST  «F  NEIT 


I  K 


- O.     '    > 


•1   umi 


fir  ^^ 


'^^. 


<■/?      'V/^      'J    ^> 


i(T<ffla^r 


^ 


®i 


^rY^4'7l<' 


-»  rlO 


Cylinders  with  Seated  Figures. 
The  earlier  equivalent  of  the  steles  with  seated  figures  usual  in  the  historical  period. 

name,  on  the  earlier  it  succeeds  it.      By  the  analogy  of  the  seated   figure  it  is 
probable  that  the  bird  was  regarded  as  succeeding  the  name  on  the  cylinders. 

From  the  position,  and  the  resemblances  to  the  use  of  the  aHMu  bird  on  the 
early  steles,  it  seems  then  reasonable  to  accept  these  figures  are  representing  the 
dead  by  the  aiiMu  as  a  glorified  one,  instead  of  by  a  seated  figure.     At  the  same 

E 


The  Earliest  Imcriptioni. 


67 


No,  22  IS  a  clear  reading  -."Hinia  caiuie*  to  be  born  her  >('d/'  It  m  followed 
by  the  ia  embracing  the  adkku,  this  ibrm  oi  the  ^<r  occurring  in  the  1st  dynasty 
(/("tT^dr/  r^^w^/,  I,  seal  S6,  II,  wab  157). 

.12 


U 


UWf  T«  MMMWT 


«♦>  '  '•* 


*'*;♦". 


'"■',':''. 


'W 


PCoj    m>   uf. 


'4     '"♦* 


TWRM 


PU    u  u 

CirwnmM  wnm  im  Aitum  turn. 


13 


14 


10 


17 


/^t\  A'V*    j«4<       ^V*A 


19 


20 


/^ipiu/i^py 


21 


23 


tintim  c4  Hm 


r  hi  rUv%  inUrrA^  al«o  over  mrM  of  tlioie  alrcadjr  noticed,  hut  the  Mw 
prcvi'/^i  '  '  ■■■'■  ■'■  ■/-'■'•  *—-'*tr,A  Mparatdy  abore  in  order  to  fhiim  the  natmv 
ofth^f  /  the  Mated  lifBre  and  dw  «f>fc^. 


68  The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 

No.  23  has  a  clear  reading  :  *'  Priestess  of  Ba  lord  ot  Her-mer-shet,  priest  of 
Ba,  priest  of  Ba,  priest  of  Neit."  This  place  Hermershet  is  known  in  the  time  of 
Khafra  (Brugsch,  Geog.,  185),  but  spelt  then  with  the  hawk  instead  of  the  head, 
and  the  hoe  mer  for  the  chisel ;  the  equivalence  of  these  signs  in  early  times  is 
already  known. 

No.  24  has  many  repetitions  on  a  large  cylinder  at  Athens.  It  is  another  of 
the  favourite  plays  upon  words:  se-aun,  se-tin  sen  Neit,  "Cause  union,  cause 
existence,  conformed  to  Neit." 

No.  25  shews  an  interesting  distinction  between  n  as  part  of  a  word,  and  n 
alone  as  the  preposition ;  the  formal  and  the  simplified  shape  are  put  in  contrast, 
while  the  two  are  contrasted  in  the  reverse  manner  in  No.  29.  It  appears  to  read 
"Excellent  god,  cause  existence  for  Nefer-ni-ankhti,"  a  name  perhaps  meaning 
"  The  excellence  of  him  who  is  alive  " ;  it  is  apparently  a  proper  name,  divided  by 
a  bar  from  the  rest  of  the  inscription. 

No.  26  differs  from  the  others,  being  engraved  on  a  bone  cylinder  with  a  cross 
pattern.  It  reads  :  "  Thou  art  tended  (or  shepherded)  and  preserved  for  ever." 
The  fuller  grammatical  form,  the  finished  style  of  the  signs,  and  the  different 
character  of  the  cylinder,  point  to  a  later  date.  Perhaps  it  belongs  to  the 
Ilnd  dynasty. 

No.  27  shews  a  difficulty  in  the  second  and  third  signs ;  it  seems  strange  to 
write  d  before  shed  if  that  is  the  value  intended.  Yet,  as  inversions  are  often  found, 
it  may  be  possible  to  render  this  "  God  save,  God  nourish  thee."  A  second  sense 
of  shed  seems  suggested  by  the  repetition  with  different  spelling. 

No.  28  presents  no  difficulty,  and  reads :  "  Adorer  of  Hathor,  Mera."  Though 
the  name  is  partly  broken  it  can  hardly  be  read  otherwise,  and  Mera,  or  Mery,  is 
a  common  name  in  early  times. 

No.  29  appears  to  use  khent  in  the  sense  of  "  establish."  Nen  would  probably 
refer  to  the  form  or  resemblance ;  but  the  sense  of  repose  or  inaction  might  be 
intended.     The  whole  would  read  "  Establish  the  form  (or  repose)  of  her  ka!' 

No.  30  is  similar  in  type.  Zedu  is  an  unusual  way  of  writing  "  words  "  or 
"  speech  "  ;  but  who  can  say  what  spellings  may  have  been  current  so  early  as  this  ? 
"  Establish  her  speech  of  her  ka  "  seems  a  reasonable  rendering. 

No.  31  seems  to  be  somewhat  confused  with  repetitions.  "Anpu  conform 
her"  is  a  possible  reading;  Kat  sen-sen  s  seems  to  follow,  possibly  "the  ka  be 
united  to  her  " ;  finally,  there  may  be  a  proper  name  Senka,  followed  by  a  stroke. 


The  Theth  Formulae. 

The  frequent  recurrence  of   ^  |l  in  connection  with  the  names  of  gods  is  one 

of  the  main  points  which  requires  to  be  cleared  up  in  this  period.     With  this  goes 

another  class  of  cylinders  which  have  connected  with  the  gods'  names.     On 

looking  at  the  two  classes  32-44  and  45-54,  it  is  obvious  that  the  theth  class  are 
all  more  archaic  than  the  tet  class.  There  is  no  distinction  as  to  the  gods  named 
in  each  class,  as  there  was  between  the  gods  of  the  seated  figure  and  the  a&khu. 
From  the  style  of  the  theth  group  being  only  found  in  one  instance  (46)  of  the  tet 
group,  it  seems  clear  that  tet  succeeded  theth  in  point  of  time.  As  they  are  used  in 
precisely  the  same  way,  and  we  know  of  th  in  Pyramid  Texts  becoming  /  later, 
probably  theth  and  tet  are  all  one  word,  in  earlier  and  later  forms.     Tet  is  the  form, 


Tiie  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


69 


.u 


T!wIwl!V2-=-w! 


'»»  o,.  ■°<>    o-     r> 


+1  '  I  r 


REPEATED 


m 


ADOR.E^      OF       HATHOR 


/\A/I 


26 


7li'4 


s^r^F 


27 


28 


#5S 


Cylinders  with  Religious  Formulae. 


then,  which  we  should  look  for  in  the  known  language.  From  the  connections  of 
the  word  it  may  probably  be  a  term  of  prayer,  of  devotion,  or  of  a  priesthood. 
A  suggestion  has  been  made  that  TAetk  is  used  with  male  deities,  Thethet  with 
female.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case,  as  these  forms  are  used  in  the  same 
proportions  with  male  and  female  deities. 

At  first  the  sense  of  "  nourished,"  from  o  1^  o  ,  or  f^  ,  might  seem  likely  ; 


but  the  early  form  of  that  is  stated  to  be  *^  °  ' ,  though  this  is  not  quite  con- 
clusive, as  *^.  is  so  little  used  at  this  time  that  it  only  occurs  twice  on  seventy 
cylinders  (7,  26).     Another  possible  root  is  ci  ^  o  "  image  "  or  "  likeness,"  with 

the  derived  senses  "to  be  like"  or  equal.     Also  o(1q  "a  part"  might  be  considered. 

When  we  see  the  frequency  of  sen  and  sensen,  meaning  conformity  or  union  with 

E  3 


70  The  Earliest  Inicriptions. 

the  gods,  it  is  evident  that  such  an  expression  as  "  like  unto "  a  god  would  be 
nearly  parallel,  and  not  at  all  improbable.  For  the  present,  therefore,  we  may- 
render  theth,  and  its  historical  form  of  tet,  as  "  like  unto,"  without  prejudice  to  some 
other  rendering  if  a  closer  parallel  can  be  found. 

No.  32.  Here  the  signs  are  separated  by  the  first  ka,  and  precede  the  second 
ka.  "  Like  unto  the  ka  "  is  not  an  improbable  phrase  when  we  recognise  the  ka 
as  the  ancestral  guardian  spirit. 

No.  33  reads:  "Like  unto  Neit "  with  the  personal  name  Ner;  compare 
nera,  "  a  man." 

No.  34  reads :  "  Like  unto  Sekhmet,"  with  the  name  Peka. 

No.  35  is  "  Like  to  Neit,  like  to  Shu."  The  figure  of  Shu  is  one  of  the  earliest 
of  any  god,  occurring  often  on  the  Ilnd  dynasty  sealings,  see  in  Royal  Tombs,  II, 
seal  178,  with  seal  2CX)  proving  the  u  bird  to  be  intended,  and  the  feather  on  the 
head  in  seal  199. 

No.  36  reads  :  "  Like  unto  the  great  Ba,  like  unto  Neit."  The  form  of  throne 
with  this  figure  is  not  known  elsewhere. 

Nq.  37  states  the  person  to  be  like  to  Neit  and  Uazet ;  at  the  end  of  the 
formula  is  M  which  is  in  the  place  of  a  personal  name.  This  suggests  that  the 
owl  was  at  that  time  a  syllabic,  perhaps  ma  "  come  !  " — a  birth  name. 

No.  38.  Here  we  see  "  Like  to  Neit,  like  to  Hen  " ;  the  latter  should  be  the 
name  of  a  god  in  this  position. 

No.  39  names  Neit  and  At;  the  latter  is  probably  at  "father,"  and  being  "  like 
unto  the  father  "  would  refer  to  assimilation  to  the  ancestral  ka.  The  personal 
name  Nerher,  should  be  compared  to  the  name  Ner  in  No.  33,  as  there  it  might  be 
ner  "  man,"  so  here  Nerher  might  mean  the  "  over  man,"  or  "  man  of  Horus." 

No.  40.  Here  the  dead  is  stated  to  be  "  Like  unto  Mafdet,  like  unto  At."  For 
Mafdet  see  Royal  Tombs,  II,  50,  pi.  vii. 

No.  41.  This  may  be  a  matter  of  repetition,  without  varied  meaning  ;  but  a 
continuous  sense  may  be  intended,  somewhat  thus  : — "  Causing  love  like  unto  Neit, 
she  loves  like  Neit."  The  first  figure  must  be  that  of  the  goddess  seated,  without 
the  table  of  food  offerings.  After  that  comes  the  name  Dy-Neit,  "  the  gift  of 
Neit,"  and  the  seated  figure  of  the  person  with  the  usual  table. 

No.  42  reads  :  "  Like  unto  the  gods,  causing  pleasing  by  invocation"  {s-klter-tias), 
and  the  same  phrase  repeated. 

No.  43  reads  :  "  Like  unto  Ba  the  generator  (?),  like  unto  Sekhmet." 

No.  44  names  a  very  unusual  worship  of  Hait,  "  The  Shiners,"  the  sun  and 
moon  together.     "  Like  under  the  Shiners,  she  is  united  to  the  Shiners." 

The  Tet  Formulae. 

This  we  have  seen  to  be  probably  the  later— or  historical — form  of  the  earlier 
theth,  and  perhaps  best  rendered  by  "  like  unto." 

No.  45  names  a  series  of  deities — Hathor,  Set,  Neit,  Horus,  and  Un  "  the 
Being,"  short  for  Un-nefer  Osiris.  To  all  these  the  person  is  stated  to  be 
assimilated, — like  unto  them. 

No.  46  reads :  "  Like  unto  Shu,  like  unto  Neit." 

No.  47  reads:  "Like  unto  Neit,"  with  the  personal  name  Neit-mest-onkh, 
"  Neit  bears  alive." 

We  now  reach  a  series  of  seven  cylinders  (48-54)  with  the  same  formulae, 
tet  en  tnerut  nekhebt,  which  may  perhaps  be  rendered  "  Like  unto  Nekhebt  for  love," 
or  "  Like  to  Nekhebt,  loving,"  or  "  Assimilated  by  desire  of  Nekhebt." 


I 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


71 


A.'^N 


u 


A 


Ta 


-IKE    UNTO   IN 


LIKE    UNTO  NEIT 


M 


no 

LIKE     TO      SKU 


L1H.E    UMTO   SEKHMEl 


^f  ,.>«'^/a 


ulKE    UMTO    HEN  LIKE    ONTO  NEIT    ' 

LIKE     UNTO    HCR  FATHER.  ANB  NEIT 
U1K.E    Ta  HER    FATHER  '^  P  r.  ' '^  ^  > 


(.f,.^^^     SHE  LOVES   LIKE      4  <o;^</^.  TLT     I       /I/      /WA^^    /\ 


L1K.E    To   SEKHMET     '''Vf^     S^     "^f 


;?  ur//U/ 


/\/\y^ 


U  o 


32 


33 


34 


35 


/- 


36 


38 


Cf^H(^=f 


39 


^S?^ 


j'ipfir/'^ 


«k  40 


ftiTftirsT'  f 


43 


^fP«f 


Cylinders  with  the  Thftii  Formulae 
Staling  the  likeness  or  similarity  to  the  Gods. 


E  4 


72 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


Nos.  48,  49,  50  are  all  of  priests  of  Hathor. 

No.  5 1  has  the  personal  name  Aa  or  Y. 

No.  52  may  read :  "  Belonging  to  Horus,  Nefer  pert  Ra  neb  (name,  '  Good 
outgoing  every  day')."  Perhaps  the  division  should  be  different,  and  the  reading 
"  Excellence  of  coming  forth  every  day,  for  the  assimilated,  by  love  of  Nekhebt, 
Nesa-hor"  (name).  The  phrase  pert  ra  neb  is  equivalent  to  the  per  em  heru, 
coming  forth  to-day  in  the  future  world. 


^idit 


^vf 


+ 


c— 1 


Y^^  CD  -- 


^'^c^^-y^u.^'^'r    '^y     "^y    ^'>o 


11=- 


r-'    <^ 


V,J^ 


^0»  or   HATHoa 


SAME      coMrusEj 


SA^AE         CONFOStD 


SAME  CO  IMPOSED 


SAME 


i>J'''^'        » 


PIS   n  J 


^18 


oo/nr 


47 


f4 


Si- 
Li 


50 


51 


52 


53 


54 


Cylinders  with  the  Tut  Formulae. 
Later  form  of  the  Theth  formulae. 


No.  53  is  a  more  complex  example.     It  may  read  :  "  Made  to  flourish  because 
of  the  king,  like  unto  the  excellence  of  the  shiners  {nefer  Hait),  similarly,  like 

unto  Nekhebt  loving  (or  by  love),  Persen  (name)."   In  early  writing  y  <cr>  is  used 
for  l\ 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


73 


No.  54.  This  most  complex  cylinder  may  be  separated  into  three  groups, 
each  beginning  hen  sa  ten,  or  se  nefer  ten.  The  first  group  ends  with  tet  en  merut 
nekhebt,  as  above ;  the  last  group  ends  with  a  personal  name,  inert  kitet  nefer 
Neferti,  devoted  to  the  Lord.  Until  the  more  simple  inscriptions  are  cleared  up, 
we  cannot  hope  to  deal  with  the  whole  of  this. 


♦ 


4'1 


^   \    I 


TRULY  EXCELLENT 

IN    COMMAND  RY 


HIS     WIFE 


Pi  i  i 

4=     ^       m 


0 


¥-^ 


^^> 


Cylinders  with  Phrases 
Complimentary  to  the  deceased  person. 


f^nnuR 


55 


U^/?U>\!7 


56 


Phrases. 

No.  55  begins  with  a  title  hedn  found  on  sealings  from  the  Royal  Tombs 
(^R.T.,  II,  307-8-13)  ;  next  is  the  personal  name  Ry  which  we  have  had  before  in 
No.  12;  then  the  phrase  ne/er  uz  ;«^<7/,  "  truly  excellent  in  command"  (Sethe)  ; 
lastly,  the  name  again,  Ry. 

No.  56  is  very  simple :  "  His  wife,  Temka,"  the  name  meaning  "  the  perfection 
of  the  kar 

No.  57  reads:  "Sweetness  conformed  to  her  sweetness"  (that  of  Uazet),  with 
the  name  Nes-uazet,  "  belonging  to  Uazet." 

No.  58  is  a  duplicated  reading.  Hen  is  only  known  as  "  pleasing,"  in  literature 
of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  but  it  may  have  been  in  popular  use  much  earlier.  If  so, 
this  may  read :  "  Let  pleasing  speech  be,  Aoh-sen  "  (name). 

No.  59  reads,  apparently  :  Benert  (with  determinative  of  a  date)  nef  en  Duat 
"  Sweetness  of  wind  of  Duat,"  a  wish  for  the  future  life.  The  Duat  is  curiously 
written  with  the  hand  as  the  initial,  and  then  five  spots  reading  dua. 

No.  60  reads,  apparently :  "  He  whom  the  king  loves  increases  excellently, 
Horncsa  "  (name,  repeated).     The  mouth  sign  is  unusual  in  having  the  lips  closed. 


74  The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


Titles. 

An  interesting  group  was  found  by  Dr.  Reisner  at  Naga  ed-Ddr,  evidently 
connected  together  with  the  public  business,  Nos.  6i  to  64.  They  all  mention 
the  senti,  plans,  of  the  temple  of  Neit.  As  the  plan  sign  is  a  looped  cord,  it  is 
most  likely  that  it  was  derived  originally  from  land  measures  and  surveys,  rather 
than  from  house  plans  on  a  small  scale,  which  would  be  laid  out  by  a  stick 
measure.  No  great  buildings  were  erected  at  this  period,  as  they  were  in  later 
times  when  a  cord  was  used  at  the  founding  of  temples.  The  plans,  therefore, 
at  this  early  date,  were  probably  of  the  priestly  estates,  the  landed  endowment ; 
for  this,  our  word  survey  is  the  better  rendering.  Another  word  connected  is  as, 
which  appears  in  per  as,  the  office  or  house  of  the  as.  This,  in  such  a  connection 
suggests  as  "  to  measure,"  or  "  make  a  plan,"  also  connected  with  the  derived 
senses  of  the  Coptic  asou  "  reckonings,"  or  the  earlier  "  recompense." 

No.  61  might  then  perhaps  read  :  "  Temple  of  the  ka  of  Neit,  over  the  survej-s 
and  plans." 

No.  62.  "  Over  the  temple  of  the  ka  of  Neit,  over  the  surveys  of  the  temple 
of  the  ka." 

No.  63.  "  Over  the  office  of  surveys  of  Neit's  temple  of  the  ka,  over  her 
temple." 

No.  64.  "  Over  (?  /ler)  surveys  of  the  valley  (cemetery  ?)  Her-s-ka  (name),  the 
office  of  plans,  Ka-her-s  "  (name). 

In   65    and   66   appears  the  iinnut  of  Neit,  perhaps  the  hour  priests  of  the 

goddess.     As  here  seems  as  if  it  must  be  the  phonetic  form  of  r ;  we  cannot  say 

what  the  orthography  should  be  at  such  a  date.     If  so,  the  sense  may  be — 

No.  65.  "  Place  of  the  hour  priest  of  Neit." 

No.  66.  "  Place  of  watching  of  the  hour  priest  of  Neit." 

No.  67.  Here  the  usual  land  signs  are  placed  upright,  and  not  sideways  as  in 
later  writing  (see  Royal  Tombs,  1 1,  seal  197).  The  title  is  repeated,  "  Lands  of  Horus 
(the  king)  in  the  Nome  of  Oxyrhynkhos."  The  leaping  gazelle  must  be  a  part 
of  the  nome-sign,  as  it  is  placed  between  the  uSs  and  the  land-sign  determinative. 

No.  68  is  another  official  seal,  that  of  the  haritn,  reading :  "  The  woman's  house, 
the  house  of  beauty."  The  determinative  is  not  the  quadrant  building,  as  in 
later  signs,  but  an  elaborated  plan  with  returns  at  the  entrance. 

No.  69  is  the  seal  of  the  irrigation  office :  "  Cutting  the  dykes,  opening  the 
banks  "  or  dams,  the  modern  gisr,  see  Griffith,  Kahun  Papyri,  p.  100. 

No.  70  appears  rather  confused  in  the  structure  of  the  sentence.  The  first 
sign  qa,  which  in  later  use  is  a  height  or  elevation,  seems  here  as  if  used  for  an 
active  verb,  "  to  lift,"  and,  as  applied  to  a  door,  to  open :  compare  the  Hebrew 
simile  "  Be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors."  Or  it  may  be  that  the  arm  and  hand 
reads  as  d,  so  forming  qed,  "  to  turn  round,"  or  turn  the  door  on  its  hinge.  Some 
such  sense  is  required,  by  the  sign  of  the  door  which  follows.  It  seems  to  read : 
"  Oponing  of  the  door  of  the  ka  statue  (ga)  of  the  god  Horus,"  or  of  the  statue  of  the 
divine  ka  of  Horus.  The  falcon  here  may  be  the  emblem  of  the  king,  and  not 
of  the  god  Horus.     This  is  a  large  wooden  cylinder. 

Early  Dynastic  Cylinders. 

We  cannot  here  enter  on  the  wide  subject  of  the  sealings  of  the  early  dynasties; 
those  being  nearly  all  seals  of  royal  officials  and  domains,  are  very  different  to  the 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


75 


X 


u 

^0 


) 


u 


H  ®^  St 


^^-V^s^-v^^ 


OF  K\  OF 
N  E  IT 


G    I2tuS 


¥. 


t 


°P , 


-.;^ 


.;^c^ 


""^"..W^o^, 


Oa'"V/ 


■'Os 


"9 


n|n  nn^ 


a 


Of 


a. 


3^ 


-A- 


D 
0 


^1 


64 


65 


nfnPo/ 


^68 


0  liruif  ° 


Cylinders  with  Titles. 
Earlier  in  style  than  the  dynastic  cylinders  with  titles. 

classes  we  have  hitherto  noticed.  Five  actual  cylinders  belonging  to  the  1st  or 
Ilnd  dynasty  are  here  published  ;  they  approach  the  general  class  of  the  sealings 
from  Abydos. 

No.  71  is  the  seal  of  an  "  Interpreter  of  (an  office)  at  Senshe."  In  the  name  of 
the  office  or  department  we  can  only  read  vt&.  The  place  Senshe  is  not  known. 
We  may  note  that  the  kh  sign  never  has  more  than  two  vertical  lines  (Nos.  6, 19, 42), 
sometimes  it  only  has  horizontals  (Nos.  42,  74),  sometimes  dots  (69).  The  nome 
sign  has  four  verticals  {6'j^\  here  a  hieroglyph  which  appears  to  be  a  place-sign  has 
three  verticals. 


^6  The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 

No.  72  reads  with  a  play  upon  the  name  of  the  man.  "The  sealer 
of  the  excellent  cultivation  of  crops,  Nefertu."  For  sezta,  "sealer,"  see  Royal 
Tombs,  II,  53.  Renp,  crops,  is  here  written  without  the/,  but  the  growing-plant  sign 
identifies  the  word.  The  root  is  renen,  young,  growing  things,  and  hence  plants, 
flowers,  vegetables,  or  crops  in  general.  The  year  is  called  renpet,  as  meaning 
a  season  ;  in  fact  the  reckoning  was  literally  by  crops,  which  were  necessarily  annual 
with  a  sterile  period  between,  owing  to  the  inundation.  Apparently  the  loop  th  is 
used  for  the  feminine  t  at  the  end  of  renp.  (The  rendering  of  this  group  in  Mahasna, 
p.  20,  does  not  seem  applicable  here.) 

No.  73  is  the  seal  of  a  man  Onkh-nekht,  who  is  described  as  a  "  true  ruler "; 
perhaps  the  kherp  bearers  were  a  definite  peerage,  and  this  was  an  assertion  of  a 
man  genuinely  belonging  to  the  order.  Such  a  system  is  suggested  by  the  kherp 
(or  sekhem)  pectoral  described  on  pp.  3-4.  He  is  described  also  as  "  belonging  to 
(a  goddess)";  the  name  is  defaced,  the  form  of  the  stick  of  wood,  kket,  is  different 
from  the  later  sign. 

No  74.  This  cylinder  (at  Berlin)  reads  readily,  as  "  Royal  overseer,  Sen-mut, 
loved  by  his  mistress,"  probably  he  was  a  steward  of  the  queen.  It  is  curious  to  see 
this  name,  which  is  so  well  known  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  occurring  thus  early; 
but  with  the  frequent  prayers  for  sen  and  sen-sen  of  the  various  gods,  it  is  evidently 
an  early  type  of  name.     The  title  may  perhaps  be  "  Overseer  of  the  South." 

No.  75  is  a  large  cylinder  of  white  limestone.  The  reading  is  simple  enough 
in  the  first  two  columns  "  Seal  of  the  stores  of  the  estate,  the  granary  of  barley  and 
spelt."  The  next  two  columns  are  differently  understood.  Some  would  see  in 
them  only  a  jumble  of  noxious  animals  put  there  to  exert  a  magic  power  on  anyone 
who  should  break  the  sealing.  But  it  would  be  difficult  then  to  see  why  four  out  of 
ten  should  be  quite  harmless,  two  geese  and  two  owls.  On  the  other  view,  the 
whole  of  it  may  have  a  regular  sense.  The  granary  just  named  was  of  a  district 
called  "  the  lake  of  the  hippopotamus  and  lion,"  a  name  likely  enough  in  early  times, 
and  probably  belonging  to  the  Delta.  Osiris  was  worshipped  as  a  lion  at 
Tell  Moqdam ;  Leontopolis  was  near ;  the  lion  was  the  sacred  animal  of  the 
Sethroite  Nome  (DUMICHEN,  Geog.  Ins.,  I,  Ixxvi) ;  and  in  the  Tanite  Nome  was  "  the 
town  of  the  lion."  As  to  the  hippopotamus,  it  abounded  in  the  Delta  till  Roman 
times.  The  name  of  the  lake  is  therefore  likely  enough.  In  the  next  column  are 
the  names  Emseh  or  Mesah  "  the  crocodile,"  a  name  familiar  later  at  Siut,  in  the 
tomb  with  the  boards  of  soldiers.  The  owl  m  is  phonetic  complement  before  the 
crocodile ;  there  is  apparently  a  bent  stick  odm  before  the  owl,  suggesting  an  earlier 
reading  of  octmseh  for  the  crocodile.  Next,  reversing  the  cylinder,  it  reads  down 
"  son  of  Sat-em-Selq."  For  a  parallel  to  this  name  see  Sat-em-Thennu, — the 
goddess  of  Erment.  Following  the  scorpion  is  a  sign  q,  which  would  be  out  of 
place  in  later  orthography,  as  a  complement.  Here  we  can  only  say  that  it  appears 
to  have  been  so  used  at  this  time. 

An  interesting  question  is  whether  the  seated  figures  with  very  long  hair 
represent  men  as  well  as  women.  There  is  no  instance  which  fixes  the  masculine 
form  in  these,  or  the  adkhu  cylinders,  but  several  feminine  constructions,  as  in  9,  10, 
17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  41,  44.  It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  these  long-haired 
figures  are  always  intended  for  women.  Other  feminine  cylinders  are  29,  30,  31,  56, 
57.  The  masculine  examples  are  26,  27,  65, 66,  75.  There  are  thus  fifteen  feminine 
to  five  masculine  cylinders ;  and  the  masculine  ones  may  well  be  all  of  a  later 
period  than  the  majority.  It  seems,  then,  that  cylinders  were  at  first  usually  for 
women,  and  only  later  became  used  in  official  work  by  men. 


The  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


77 


We  have  now  endeavoured  to  show  what  the  construction  and  general  sense  of 
these  earliest  inscriptions  are,  by  means  of  comparison  and  statistical  grouping. 


O 


'^1  171  3 


^4         ^^'t, 


0    © 

ONKH-NEKH" 


^1  l^'^f J 


i^sitr 


72 


^1 


ISI9I 


Af/fi^p^ 


73 


74 


r:; .  I 


2X 


75 


Early  Dynastic  Cylinders 
With  titles  known  in  the  Dynastic  period. 


Doubtless  many  of  the  words  will  be  better  understood  in  future ;  and,  indeed,  first 
attempts  on  a  subject  always  need  much  revision.  The  broad  lines  of  the  matter 
seem,  however,  to  be  fairly  clear,  now  that  a  large  number  of  examples  have  been 
studied  as  a  connected  whole. 

VV.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


78     ) 


FOR  RECONSIDERATION. 

Onkh-em-mdot. 

Mummy  Wheat. 

One  of  the  most  frequent  questions  asked  about  Egypt  is  concerning  "  mummy 
wheat,"  reputed  to  be  the  produce  of  wheat,  which  is  stated  to  have  been  found  with 
a  mummy.  From  the  results  of  i<eeping  modern  wheat  we  should  not  expect  that 
any  ancient  wheat,  or  other  seeds,  could  germinate.  Even  three  or  four  years  will 
kill  a  large  number  of  wheat  grains,  and  ten  or  twelve  years  leaves  hardly  any  alive. 
Hence  it  is  unthinkable  that  centuries  or  thousands  of  years  should  not  destroy  the 
vitality. 

When  I  was  at  Hawara  in  the  Fayum,  twenty-five  years  ago,  I  found  a  great 
store  of  corn.  It  was  only  late  Roman  in  date ;  a  period  from  which  a  large 
quantity  of  complex  organic  matter  usually  remains,  enough  to  putrefy  when 
wetted.  It  was  not  therefore  nearly  so  likely  to  be  sterilised  as  wheat  from  earlier 
ages.  There  was  a  large  amount,  many  bushels,  so  that  the  oxygen  would  not  act 
so  much  on  the  middle  of  such  a  mass  as  on  a  small  quantity.  I  took  the  fullest 
and  finest  grains,  and  planted  them  next  day,  so  that  there  should  be  no  time  for 
subsequent  changes  by  exposure.  I  planted  the  seeds  in  rows,  in  every  degree  ot 
moisture,  from  soft  mud  to  merely  damp  earth,  in  a  sheltered  place  by  a  canal. 
Every  possible  chance  was  thus  in  their  favour.  There  was  not  a  trace  of  sprouting; 
and  in  two  or  three  weeks  merely  spots  of  brown  decay  stained  the  earth.  At  the 
same  time  I  planted  some  dozens  of  grape  stones,  which  being  hard  and  woody 
might  be  supposed  to  resist  oxidation.     The  result  was  equally  negative. 

It  may  be  asked  how  the  belief  in  the  germination  of  ancient  seeds  has  arisen  ; 
how  it  can  be  possible  for  many  reported  cases  to  have  been  all  mistaken.  Without 
knowing  every  stage  of  the  history  of  a  case  it  is  difficult  to  see  where  an  error  may 
have  crept  in.  At  least  we  may  mention  the  sources  of  error  in  a  few  cases,  which 
are  already  traceable.  Some  unopened  mummy  coffins  were  presented  to  a  great 
personage  by  Ismail  Pasha.  On  being  opened  in  England  some  wheat  was  found 
inside  ;  it  was  planted  ;  it  grew,  and  bore  seed  ;  so  a  fresh  stock  of  mummy  wheat 
arose.  I  heard  from  a  resident  in  Egypt  that  he  remembered  seeing  those  coffins 
lying  in  the  stables,  with  the  corn  heap  run  over  them.  Doubtless  some  crack,  or 
warp  under  the  lid,  allowed  grain  to  slip  in,  and  thus  recent  grain  would  be  found 
in  a  coffin  which  was  yet  unopened. 

Another  source  of  mistakes  springs  from  the  habit  of  dealers  at  Thebes  making 
up  little  pots  of  corn  to  sell  to  tourists.  A  common  little  brown  pot — quite 
worthless — has  corn  put  in  it,  and  a  lid  plastered  over  it ;  to  be  more  attractive,  the 
lid  is  sometimes  a  scrap  of  painted  cartonnage.  Then,  shaking  the  pot,  the  dealer 
tells  the  tourist  to  listen  to  the  rattle  of  mummy  wheat.  It  is  soon  bought,  and 
taken  home  to  plant.  A  fresh  belief  in  "  real  mummy  wheat "  is  the  result,  as  the 
owner  is  certain  that  he  took  it  out  of  a  sealed  pot  himself 


For  Reconsideration.  79 

In  yet  another  way  errors  arise.  The  late  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  told  me  that 
when  the  seeds  were  recovered  from  the  ancient  rubbish  of  the  Laurion  mine  in 
Greece,  and  were  exhibited  in  London,  he  saw  visitors  taking  up  some  of  the 
ancient  raspberry  seeds,  and  some  of  the  modern  seeds  which  were  shown  for 
comparison.  After  full  e.xamination,  the  hand  was  just  shaken  out  over  the  tray 
again,  and  the  moderii  seed  went  among  the  ancient.  When  the  trials  of  growth 
took  place,  the  extraordinary  vitality  of  the  seeds  in  this  tray,  labelled  ancient, 
astonished  the  cultivators. 

Besides  these  risks,  before  the  seeds  reach  the  hands  that  plant  them,  there  is 
obviously  another  opening  for  error.  When  the  master  returns  with  some  corn 
from  Egypt,  gives  an  interesting  account  of  the  possibilities  to  his  gardener,  and 
hands  over  the  seeds  to  be  planted  with  the  greatest  care  and  every  advantage  in 
the  greenhouse,  it  would  require  a  stern  moralist  to  deny  him  the  satisfaction  which 
he  fondly  anticipates.  The  appeal  may  be  made  to  the  fact  that  the  growth  differs 
from  that  of  ordinary  plants ;  but  unless  there  are  control  experiments  to  prove 
that  it  differs  from  that  of  any  modern  seed  under  the  same  changed  conditions, 
this  evidence  is  not  valid.  As  a  rule  these  appeals  are  based  on  a  larger  and  richer 
growth  of  the  supposed  ancient  strain.  As  in  every  case  it  is  found  that  cultivation 
and  selection  have  greatly  improved  species  in  the  last  two  or  three  thousand  years, 
an  unusually  fine  product  is  really  evidence  that  the  strain  must  be  modern,  and  the 
special  excellence  is  due  to  the  kindly  circumstances  of  the  advantages  given  to  it 
by  the  experimenter. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


8o    ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Zeitschrift  fur  Aegyptische  Sprache,   50  Band.     191 2 

(Published,   191 3). 

Sethe,  K. — Ein  iibersetiener  Konig  des  alien  Reichs.     The  king  in  question  is 

with  the 


f  \  —*—  \  j ,  who  has  usually  been  taken  to  be  the  same  as  (  (] 


second  — -»—  omitted  by  a  mistake  of  the  scribe.     But  in  the  tomb  of  Ptahhetep  at 
Saqqara   are   two   place   names,    (  (j  — «—  (j      7  r  nr  ©    and   (  \ 


^  r  "TT  ©  .     "  Two  similarly  named  estates  of  one  owner  in  one  and  the 

same  place  would  be  unparalleled."     The  chief  evidence  for  the  existence  of  this 

king  is  in  the  personal-name  [  (j  — «—  \\   ■¥■  >  which  occurs  on  a  slab  belonging  to 

and  contemporary  with  the  temple  of  Ne-user-ra,  as  the  name  of  one  of  the  court- 
officials  of  that  king.  This  shows  that  the  man  who  bore  the  name  must  have  been 
born  in  or  before  the  reign  of  Ne-user-ra,  and  therefore  could  not  have  taken  his 
name  from  Assa,  who  was  the  second  in  succession  after  Ne-user-ra.  As  to  the 
date  of  this  new  king,  there  are  only  two  places  in  which  he  can  occur,  (i)  at  the 
end  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  amongst  the  kings  whose  names  are  imperfectly  known, 
or  (2)  as  one  of  the  immediate  predecessors  of  Ne-user-ra,  between  him  and  Nefer- 
ar-ka-ra  Ka-ka-a,  who  reigned  so  short  a  time  that  hardly  any  traces  of  him  remain. 

The  position  is  fairly  well  fixed  by  the  personal  name  (  \  — »—  \\  of  a 

priest  of  the  Vlth  dynasty ;  for  it  is  hardly  possible  that  a  man  should  take  the 
name  of  a  half-forgotten  king  unless  he  were  born  in  that  king's  reign.  Therefore 
a  man  who  died  in  the  Vlth  dynasty  might  well  have  been  born  in  the  reign  of  an 
immediate  predecessor  of  Ne-user-ra.     In  the  tomb  of  the  Vizier  Uash-ptah,  in  the 

reign  of  Neferarkara,  a  high  official  is  named   (1  — »—  (1 ;  he  is  the  father  or  near 

relative  of  the  vizier,  whose  son  has  the  same  name.  It  is  possible  that  one  of  these 
two  may  have  usurped  the  throne. 

tjber  dem  Gebrauch  der  Konigsnavieti  in  Namensusammenselzungen  im  alien 
Reich.  This  is  an  appendix  to  the  foregoing  paper.  It  shows  that  the  Egyptians 
had  in  the  Old  Kingdom  a  definite  rule  for  the  use  of  the  king's  cartouche-names 
in  place-  and  personal-names.  The  throne-name  was  used  for  places,  the  personal- 
name' for  persons.  There  are  two  exceptions  to  this  rule  as  regards  place-names, 
the  throne-  and  personal-names  of  Pepy  I  and  Assa  being  used  indifferently  ;  but 
only  one  exception  as  regards  personal-names,  Pepy  I's  throne-  and  personal-names 
being  again  used  indifferently.  By  applying  this  rule  it  becomes  clear  that  six 
kings  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties  had  only  one  name  each  for  both  cartouches. 
These  six  kings  are  :  Userkaf,  Sahura,  Nefer-ef-ra,  Unas,  Teta,  and  Aty. 


Zeitschrift  filr  Aeg}'ptische  Sprache.  8 1 

BURCHARDT,  MAX. — Zur  Rassengekorigkeit  der  Hyksos.  In  the  only  two 
places  where  the  Egyptians  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  give  an  exact  designation 

to  the   Hyksos,  they  are  called    |  ^v    ^  "^ ,  damn,  and  "^  |  1 1 1  '"^  fN^vi , 

mnt'iu  styt,  that  is  they  considered  them  among  the  peoples  whom  we  call  Semitic. 
E.  Meyer  pronourvses  against  the  view  that  the  Hyksos  came  from  Asia  Minor,  and 
joined  themselves  with  the  Hittites  who  overthrew  the  Babylonian  empire,  he  also 
acknowledges  that  the  names  which  appear  non-Semitic  have  not  yet  been  found  in 
Asia  Minor.  But  of  the  non-Egyptian  names  which  remain  to  us  from  the  period 
of  the  foreign  occupation,  seven  out  of  nine  can  be  proved  to  be  Western  Semitic. 
From  this  proportion  of  Semitic  names  it  is  very  evident  that  the  core  of  the 
Flyksos  was  Semitic.  Therefore  Asia  Minor  cannot  be  looked  upon  as  the  original 
home  of  the  Hyksos,  but  rather  Syria,  particularly  Arabia.  We  have  here 
a  migration  of  Semitic  peoples  which  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  Asia  Minor- 
North-Syrian  movement  as  the  migration  of  the  Germanic  peoples  bore  to  the 
Huns. 

Naville,  Edouard. — La  XI'  dynastie  (with  i  illustration).  This  is  a  review 
of  the  reasons  for  retaining  the  order  of  the  kings  of  the  Xlth  dynasty  which 
Dr.  Naville  has  already  put  forward.  M.  Gauthier  has  accepted  this  order  in  his 
"  Livre  des  Rois,"  but  Dr.  von  Bissing  proposes  a  new  arrangement.  According  to 
the  evidence  of  the  temple  at  Deir  el-Bahri,  there  are  two  kings,  each  having  the 
same  personal  name,  but  whose  throne-names,  though  pronounced  the  same,  are 

The  latter  name 


differently   written.     These   are        G  -^=^  \       and    ( 


o^A 


^ 


occurs  only  in  the  shrines  of  the  princesses,  which  could  not  have  been  built  till  the 

temple  was  already  in  existence.     That  the  reading  hpt  for  |  is  correct  is  shown  by 

the  two  eyes  and  the  lotus  blossom  which  are  represented  in  the  carefully  detailed 
examples  of  this  sign  ;  measurements  of  the  oar  in  the  cartouche  show  that  the 
length  of  the  handle  and  the  width  of  the  blade  are,  with  one  exception,  constant, 
while  the  oar  which  reads  kheru  is  irregular  in  size  ;  nor  can  the  sign  read  khein  as 
the  oar  which  is  so  vocalised  is  always  represented  diagonally  and  with  a  rope 

attached.     The   Horus  titles   of  the  two  kings  differ:  "^   1    /j  (  ^  ^  1  and 

Vv  IT  ^^^  f  o  ^^  I     .     As  to  the  Table  of  Kings  at  Karnak,  the  reason  for  the 

omissions  are  still  to  seek.  Did  Thothmes  wish  to  honour  all  kings  who  had  done 
something  for  Thebes,  who  were  buried  there,  or  who  had  erected  some  building 
however  small  ?  It  would  seem  that  the  list  mentions  only  kings  who  were  really 
kings,  or  who  were  considered  as  such.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  kings  of  this 
period  always  mention  the  name  of  their  mothers,  rarely  that  of  the  father, 
indicating    perhaps    that    they    obtained    the    succession    through    the   mother. 

Mentuhetep  I  is  called  ^Os,  ,  "  the  ancestor."     It  is  suggested  that  this  name 


was  given  at  a  later  date,  to  distinguish  this  king  from  his  successors  of  the  same 
name.  Before  recapitulating  his  order  of  the  kings.  Dr.  Naville  gives  his  reasons 
for  believing  that  this  dynasty  came  from  Coptos,  and  that  the  kings  gave  a  great 
impetus  to  the  cult  of  the  Theban  gods,  Mentu  and  Amon.     The  order  of  the  kings 

then  is :  Antef  I,  who  was  □  ~^^,  and  who  is  probably  the  same  as  the  A  '^  IJ 
of  the  stele  of  Drah  abu'l  Negga  ;  Antef  II,  who  is  also  called      A    ^  ,  who  is 


82  Zeitscluift  fiir  Aegyptisclie  Sprache. 

represented  on  his  stela  with  his  dogs  ;  Antef  III  is  the  son  of  Antef  II,  and  is  also 
called    Antef-aa ;    Mentu-hetep    I,    whose     Horus-name    means    the     ancestor; 

Mentuhetep    II,    T^  [o^^'}],   who   built    the    temple    at    Deir    cl-Bahri ; 

Mentuhetep    III,   (©■^^'^j;    Mentuhetep   IV,  whose  inscriptions  are  found  at 

HammamSt ;  Mentuhetep  V,  who  made  an  expedition  to  Punt.  Besides  these, 
there  are  other  Antefs  and  Mentuheteps,  who  either  were  not  kings  or  belong  to  a 

succeeding  dynasty.     The  king  (  o  ^  LJ  J  (   ^§    R    ] ,  discovered  by  Mr.  Weigall, 

though  perhaps  belonging  to  this  dynasty,  has  as  yet  been  found  only  in  Nubia ; 
as  it  is  uncertain  whether  Nubia  was  under  the  rule  of  the  Xlth  dynasty  kings,  it 
seems  probable  tliat  this  newly  discovered  king  belongs  to  the  Xlllth  dynasty. 

Plaumann,  Gerhard. — Die  demotischen  und  die  griechischen  Eponymen- 
datierungen.  Owing  to  the  misunderstandings  and  mistakes,  which  are  more 
common  in  the  demotic  than  in  the  Greek  records,  it  is  obvious  that,  when  the 
demotic  and  the  Greek  do  not  agree,  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  the  Greek.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  in  the  difficult  question  of  Eupator  in  the  order  of  the 
Ptolemies  as  given  in  the  title  of  the  priest  of  Alexander.  The  reason  being  that 
the  demotic  was  here  merely  a  translation  of  the  Greek.  This  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that,  where  in  Greek  there  was  a  genitive,  it  has  been  translated  by  a  genitive 
into  demotic,  though  the  Egyptian  would  have  grammatically  required  a  nominative. 
Again,  in  the  list  of  priestesses  and  in  formulae  of  dates,  a  glance  at  the  Greek 
original  shows  the  mistakes  of  the  demotic  translator. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm. — Die  demotische  Inschrift  auf  der  Statue  von  Rhodes. 
(2  illustrations.)  The  statue  is  of  a  standing  man,  who  from  the  remains  of  the 
headdress,  is  certainly  a  king.  Equally  certainly  it  is  a  statue  of  the  Ptolemaic 
period  made  in  Egypt.  The  head,  feet  and  one  arm  are  lost.  On  the 
pilaster  at  the  back  is  a  demotic  inscription :  "  Before  Osiris-Apis,  the  great  god, 
and  Isis,  the  great  goddess.  Dionysios,  the  man  of  lasos."  As  it  is  quite  unknown 
that  a  private  person  should  dedicate  a  statue  of  his  sovereign  in  the  temple,  one  is 
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  this  Dionysios,  who  represents  himself  as  a  Pharaoh, 
was  one  of  those  Egyptian  rulers  of  whom  we  hear  in  the  Ptolemaic  annals.  From 
the  fact  that  the  name  is  given  without  titles,  he  would  appear  to  have  been 
a  prominent  man.  Diodorus  (XXXI,  15a)  mentions  a  Aiovvaio<;  6  KoKov/Mevot 
UeToaopaTTK,  who  raised  an  insurrection  in  the  Delta,  and  possessed  so  much  power 
that  he  might  well  consider  himself  the  ruler  of  Egypt.  From  the  inscription  the 
statue  represents  a  Karian  of  lassos ;  and  it  is  possible  that  he  was  a  Karian  leader 
of  mercenaries  in  the  service  of  the  Ptolemies,  who  had  by  degrees  arrived  at 
a  position  when  he  dared  to  attempt  to  seize  the  crown. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm. — Aus  der  Strassburger  Sammlung  demotischer 
Ostraka.  (3  illustrations.  A  continuation  of  a  paper  published,  A.Z.,  1911.) 
No.  5.  A  fragment  of  a  vocabulary,  giving  a  list  of  the  names  of  parts  of  the  face. 
It  is  probably  part  of  a  much  longer  list  of  names  of  parts  of  the  body.  It  dates 
from  the  Ptolemaic  period. 

No.  6.  A  protocol  of  Ptolemy  IV  Philopator.  The  dating  supplements  and 
is  supplemented  by  the  demotic  Pap.  Hauswaldt  17.  The  Louvre  papyrus 
published  by  Boudier,  which  is  dated  four  or  perhaps  eight  months  earlier  than  Pap. 
Hauswaldt  17,  shows  that  the  name  of  the  priest  of  Ptolemais  was  the  same  in  both. 


ZeitscJu-ift  fiir  Aeg)'pttscfie  Sprache.  83 

No.  7.  A  quittance  for  taxes  paid  for  the  sacred  crocodile.  Though  single 
words  here  and  there  are  doubtful,  the  tenor  of  the  document  is  quite  clear. 
Pechytes  has  paid  in  the  year  32,  twenty  artaba  of  wheat  for  the  crocodile  in  advance 
for  the  year  33,  the  quittance  is  to  show  that  in  the  year  33  no  further  demand  can 
be  made  upon  him.  As  the  Ostrakon  comes  from  Thebes,  the  Theban  crocodile  is 
meant,  not  the  crobodile  of  the  Fayum.  The  document  dates  from  the  second  half 
of  the  Ptolemaic  era. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm.  Zwei  Kalksteinplatten  mit  demotischen  Texten. 
(2  plates.)  PI.  I.  Bought  in  Luqsor,  said  to  have  come  from  the  Theban  cemetery ; 
it  is  dated  to  the  first  part  of  the  Ptolemaic  dynasty.  This  is  a  writing-exercise,  or 
a  rough  copy,  containing  the  beginnings  of  several  stories.  Lines  1-5  are  perhaps 
an  oracle  by  dream,  in  which  a  man  appears  to  the  king  in  a  dream  and  upbraids 
him  with  neglecting  the  gods.  Lines  6-8  are  from  an  entirely  different  story. 
Possibly  the  original  writing  had  been  washed  off  this  part,  and  the  blank  space 
thus  obtained  had  been  re-used.  In  lines  9-10  is  found  the  beginning  of  a  legend 
of  Osiris,  who  "  went  to  the  place  of  fighting." 

PI.  II.  Found  by  Legrainin  Karnak.  It  is  dated  between  the  years  204-180  B.C. 
Though  in  the  form  of  a  letter,  it  is  probably  only  an  exercise.  Its  sole  interest  lies 
in  the  mention  of  the  rarely-mentioned  king,  Harmachis,  who  reigned  in  the  time 
of  Ptolemy  Epiphanes.  For  his  position  see  the  paper  reported  on  pp.  40  and  41 
of  this  journal. 

SpiegELBERG,  Wilhelm. — Denkstein  einer  Kultgenossenschaft  in  Dendera  aus 
der  Zeit  der  Augustus.  (4  illustrations.)  This  stele  was  found  at  Dendereh  by 
sebakhin,  though  the  exact  spot  is  not  known.  It  represents  a  king  offering  to 
Hathor,  Horus  and  Nekhbet,  all  three  deities  being  in  animal  form  ;  and  was 
dedicated  by  the  great  kettbet  of  the  god  Harsamtus,  in  remembrance  of  their 
restoration  of  the  forecourt  of  Isis.  The  word  '"te"  is  discussed,  and,  from  the 
instances  occurring  on  mummy-labels,  it  appears  to  be  a  title,  though  not  a  priestly 
title.     It  is  suggested  that  it  may  be  an  office  in  the  kenbet. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm.  Hieroglyphisch  -  demotische  Muviienetiketten. 
(i  plate,  3  illustrations.)  Hitherto  only  one  mummy-label  written  in  hieroglyphs 
has  been  known ;  two  more  are  published  here,  which  were  obtained  at  Luqsor. 

No.  I.  On  the  obverse  is  the  hieroglyphic  inscription  with  the  demotic  below, 
reading  "  Kolanthes  the  younger,  son  of  Chrates."  On  the  reverse  is  a  semi- 
obliterated  line  of  hieroglyphs. 

No.  2.  A  long  narrow  strip  of  wood,  painted  at  one  end  like  a  miniature 
obelisk.  On  the  obverse  is  a  vertical  inscription  in  hieroglyphs ;  an  invocation  to 
the  goddesses  for  food  for  "  Te-shere-[n]-pete-Min,  daughter  of  Te-shere-[n]-pete- 
Min.  May  Hathor  give  thee  bread.  May  Menket  give  thee  beer.  May  Heset 
give  thee  milk."  On  the  reverse  a  horizontal  line  of  hieroglyphs,  and  at  the  end 
three  horizontal  lines  of  demotic  repeat  the  name  of  the  woman  and  her  mother. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm.  Ein  demotischer  Grabstein  der  rdmischer  Kaiserzeit. 
(Plate.)  The  scene  represents  the  deceased  being  led  by  Anubis  into  the  presence 
of  Osiris.     The  inscription  appears  to  be  the  speech  of  Anubis. 

{To  be  continued^ 

F   2 


(     84     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Tlie  Voice  of  Africa. — By  Leo  Frobenius.  2  vols.,  8vo,  682  pp.,  70  plates, 
200  figures.     2%s.     No  Index.     1913.     (Hutchinson.) 

This  is  an  important  book  as  giving  a  general  summary  of  the  German 
Anthropological  Expedition  of  1910-12  in  Nigeria.  The  author  organised  his  work 
most  ably,  getting  agents  to  collect  information  in  far-distant  districts,  especially 
from  exiles  who  would  more  readily  give  it.  His  care  was  to  reach  the  ideas  of  the 
people  and  their  concealed  beliefs  ;  and  the  value  of  the  objects  he  collected  was 
immensely  increased  by  his  use  of  them  to  bring  out  the  thoughts  and  memories  of 
the  natives,  with  whom  he  incessantly  conversed  about  them.  A  certain  tone 
of  self-centred  satisfaction,  and  obliviousness  of  other  points  of  view,  may  raise 
a  doubt  whether  he  had  quite  the  humble  insinuation  which  brings  out  confidences. 
But  nothing  less  than  his  "  push  "  would  have  covered  so  much  ground,  and  gained 
such  results.  He  cordially  thanks  the  British  authorities  in  many  places,  for  the 
official  help  and  personal  kindness  that  he  met  with ;  yet  there  was  a  bad  time  at 
Ilife,  where  the  old  trouble  of  people  selling  what  was  not  entirely  their  own,  led  to 
his  being  held  up  by  the  English,  to  let  the  people  resume  their  old  possessions. 
The  anthropologist  naturally  regrets  that  things  which  were  little  valued  by  natives, 
and  entirely  neglected  by  the  English,  were  turned  back  again  into  the  great  limbo 
of  the  unknown,  perhaps  never  to  be  seen  again  ;  yet  acquisitiveness  must  be 
judicious.     Now  for  the  African  archaeology. 

The  discoveries  made  show  that  there  was  a  considerable  artistic  civilisation 
somewhere  between  1,000  and  3,000  years  ago,  and  that  the  present  West  African 
is  much  degraded  below  the  former  status.  The  principal  objects — according  to 
the  illustrations — are  the  heads  in  terra-cotta,  and  especially  a  large  one  in  bronze. 
They  are  obviously  native  in  feature,  lips  and  jaws  being  identical  with  the  modern 
Yoruban  character  (see  plates  pp.  48,  312).  The  work  is  excellent,  quite  natural, 
full  of  feeling,  and  without  any  mere  conventions.  No  bodies  are  known  belonging 
to  these  heads,  nor  is  any  definite  meaning  attached  to  them.  In  every  respect 
they  are  extremely  close  to  the  pottery  heads  from  the  foreign  quarter  at  Memphis; 
if  any  of  them  had  been  found  there  they  would — though  larger — have  been 
accepted  as  all  of  the  same  class.  The  Memphite  work  cannot  have  come  from  the 
i  Niger,  it  is  too  closely  in  touch  with  Persia  and  India ;  but  the  idea,  and  even  the 
workmen,  may  have  come  from  Egypt  to  West  Africa.  The  work  of  the  fifth 
century  B.C.  may  be  the  source  ;  but  nothing  so  late  as  the  Roman  Age.  Here 
there  is,  then,  an  indication  of  date  for  the  early  civilisation.  Was  it  an  outlier  of 
the  Ethiopian  Kingdom,  like  some  other  sites? 

Besides  the  heads  there  were  other  figures,  mainly  of  animals,  carved  in  hard 
stone,  such  as  granite  and  quartz.  The  figures  published  show  that  these  are  thick 
and  heavy,  without  the  artistic  ability  seen  in  the  heads.  Much  glazed  pottery  was 
also  found ;  and  large  jars,  supposed  by  some  to  have  been  crucibles  for  melting 
glass.  One  piece  of  sculpture  of  a  figure  (p.  311,  2)  is  obviously  a  copy  of  Roman 
work  of  about  the  second  century. 


Reviews. 


85 


The  situation  of  these  remains  is  in  old 
city  sites.  The  ground  has  been  extensively- 
trenched  about  by  the  natives  in  search  of 
valuables,  and  the  mound  of  ruins  is  in  some 
places  over  tweniy  feet  deep.  Though  the 
Expedition  did  some  excavating,  there  is  no 
sense  of  levels  or  stratification  shown  in  the 
record.  It  is  evident  that  a  good  amount  of 
careful  excavation  of  successive  levels  is  required 
to  reach  historical  results  as  to  the  culture. 
Until  such  systematic  work  is  undertaken,  the  less 
anyone  digs  the  better.  A  Niger  Museum  ought 
to  be  formed,  as  near  as  may  be  to  the  main 
source  of  antiquities,  and  the  native  encouraged 
to  feel  that  it  honours  him,  and  that  he  can  look 
on  it  as  his  own,  with  all  reverence  for  its 
contents.  Then  there  might  be  but  little  trouble 
in  getting  at  all  the  priceless  ancient  work,  which 
is  still  looked  on  as  sacred. 

Another  main  line  of  influence  was  due  to 
Christian  Nubia.  This  is  shown  by  artistic 
influence,  and  by  traditions,  largely  collected  by 
the  author.  The  Gothic  interlacing  patterns, 
which  infected  the  Roman  work  in  the  mosaic  of 
the  second  century,  and  in  the  architecture  of 
the  sixth  century,  were  carried  by  the  Christian 
expansion  of  the  Justinian  Age  far  into  Africa. 
They  are  found  more  fully  preserved  on  the  Niger 
than  even  in  Coptic  work,  and  are  excellently 
shown  on  plates,  pp.  624,  634,  636 ;  but,  strong 
as  this  influence  is,  it  would  have  been  wholly 
incapable  of  such  work  as  the  terra-cotta  heads, 
— they  belong  to  the  Perso-Greek  civilisation. 

It  is  melancholy  reading  how  the  cemeteries 
of  all  North  Africa  are  being  ransacked  for  stone 
beads,  to  send  to  the  market  at  Bida,  where  they 
are  repolished  for  modern  use  (p.  444). 

The  modern  industries  are  illustrated,  both 
the  factories  of  bronze,  iron,  glass,  and  beads,  and 
also  specimens  of  work  (458,  464).  These  show 
an  instructive  mixture  of  influences,  African  squat 
globular  forms,  and  Perso-Arab  spouted  pots; 
with  patterns  of  Greek  honeysuckle  and  egg-and- 
tongue,  misnamed  as  strangely  and  ignorantly 
as  in  our  terms. 

The  author  divides  the  religious  history  into 
four  strata :  ( i)  Ancestor- worship.  (2)  Shamanism. 
(3)  Social  Cosmogony.  (4)  Islam.  He  has  the 
fullest  respect  for  the  strength  and  value  of  the 
true  African  culture,  and  social  basis  of  life,  of 


Terra-cotta  heads  from  Nigeria, 
about  fifth  century  B.C. 

F  3 


86  Reviews. 

which  he  tells  much  that  is  admirable,  and  essential  to  a  civilisation  of  such  a  climate 
and  people.  It  is  only  the  degraded,  and,  worst  of  all,  the  Europeanised  African, 
that  is  the  unwholesome  creature  which  requires  a  hard  hand. 

The  historical  theories  of  the  author  do  not  detract  from  the  value  of  his  solid 
work,  even  if  we  cannot  accept  them.  He  looks  to  Etruria  as  the  source  of  the 
civilisation,  passing  by  sea  through  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  ;  he  emphasises  that  the 
culture  is  entirely  littoral,  and  not  at  one  with  Central  Africa.  Some  features  show 
a  link  through  Morocco,  such  as  the  water  collection  from  roofs,  and  the  form  of 
the  bow.  The  hand-loom  is  linked  with  the  togo  dress,  which  is  practically  the  toga. 
The  foot-loom  on  the  contrary  is  Asiatic ;  it  comes  later  in  Africa,  and  goes  with 
the  made-up  tunic.  The  fascination  of  a  great  name  leads  him  to  see  in  this 
Nigerian  culture  the  Atlantis ;  and  a  perfervid,  half  mystic,  vague  mode  of 
expression,  which  breaks  out  in  many  parts,  leaves  the  reader  at  a  loss  how  much 
to  discount  from  more  sober  pages.  The  various  matters  which  throw  light  on 
Egyptian  customs,  we  hope  to  deal  with  in  the  next  part  of  this  journal.  A  weeding 
of  much  that  only  relates  to  the  recorder's  feelings,  would  have  left  room  for  what 
we  want  to  know  further  about  his  collections  on  the  customs  and  physical  life  of 
the  people.  There  is  no  reference  to  measurements  or  photographs  of  the 
people  for  comparative  study.  We  must  be  thankful,  however,  to  have  obtained  so 
much  light  on  the  past  of  Nigeria,  lamentably  neglected  by  the  British 
administration. 

i         Art  in  Egypt.     By  SiR  G.  MaspERO.     Small  8vo,  313  pp.,  565  illustrations, 
j  4  coloured  plates.     6s.     (Heinemann  and  Hachette.) 

Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  egyptienne.     By  GUSTAVE  Jequier.     Small  8vo, 
330  pp.,  257  illustrations.     3'SO  frs.     (Payot,  Paris.) 

Die  Kultur  des  alten  Agypten.    Prof.  F.  W.  Freiherr  v.  Bissing.    Small  Svo, 
87  pp.,  58  figures.     i'25  marks.     (Quelle  and  Meyer,  Leipzig.) 

The  Continent  has  awakened  to  the  need  of  popular  education  on  Egypt ;  no 
longer  is  the  art  and  learning  to  be  reserved  for  costly  works,  and  its  spread  to  be 
looked  on  as  a  profanation ;  it  is  to  be  compactly  reduced  to  a  form  where  it  may 
rank  along  with  a  dozen  other  subjects  in  general  culture.  More  than  a  quarter 
of  a  century  ago,  when  it  was  remarked  to  Lanzone  that  a  little  book  was  wanted 
on  Egypt,  he  replied :  "  A  thousand  little  books  are  wanted,"  but  he  never  wrote 
one.  Now  here  we  have  three  little  books,  very  different  in  treatment  and  idea, 
and  we  can  best  value  them  by  their  contrasts. 

Each  of  these  books  must  be  regarded  in  proportion  to  its  cost.  The  German 
publisher  gives  plenty  for  the  price,  but  the  two  French  publishers  more  than 
double  the  scale  of  generosity.  We  must  not  expect  the  same  liberty  of  scope  to 
the  author  in  books  so  different  in  their  claims. 

Sir  Gaston  Maspero's  book  is  a  great  work,  which  a  generation  ago  would 
have  been  produced  exactly  twice  the  size  in  every  dimension  and  accordingly 
eight  dmes  the  price,  without  giving  us  any  more  material.  The  abundance  of 
illustrations  all  suffer  in  Hachette's  Series  on  Art  from  being  too  small ;  though 
this  is  somewhat  compensated  by  the  fineness  of  the  screen  (180)  which  enables  a 
magnifier  to  be  used  with  good  result.  The  fulness  of  material  is  treated  with  the 
author's  accustomed  skill ;  and  the  masterly  ease  with  which  he  conveys  his 
impressions  and  fixes  a  picture  in  the  reader's  mind,  recalls  his  previous  great 
works.    The  geniality  of  expression  lightens  many  pages,  as  when  we  read  that 


Reviews.  87 

"several  who  belonged  to  the  priesthood  insisted  on  being  reproduced  in  all  the 
splendour  of  their  sacred  insignia,  and  have  gained  nothing  by  the  process." 
Again  we  read  "  towards  the  close  of  the  second  Theban  Age  there  was  a  semi- 
popular  art,  marked  by  a  variety  of  aspect  and  a  freedom  of  technique  very 
disconcerting  to  those  who  still  hold  the  immobility  of  the  Egyptian  civilisation  as 
an  article  of  belirff."  All  through  the  work  we  find  the  fulness  of  ideas  and  of 
feeling  for  the  sentiment  of  the  art,  which  will  help  the  readers  to  sec  far  more  than 
they  would  ever  observe  for  themselves. 

Each  great  period  is  treated  separately,  the  Thinite  Ist-IIIrd  dynasty, 
Memphite  IVth-Xth,  Middle  Kingdom  or  First  Theban  Age,  Second  Theban  Age 
XVIIIth-XXIst,  and  Saite  carried  down  to  Roman  pottery  figures.  The  perception 
of  style  is  not  aided,  however,  by  mixing  with  the  1st  dynasty  nearly  as  many 
illustrations  belonging  to  subsequent  periods ;  they  put  the  eyes  out  for  grasping 
what  is  really  characteristic,  almost  as  badly  as  the  binder's  insertion  of  a 
rampantly-coloured  plate  of  the  XXIst  dynasty  in  the  middle  of  the  Pyramid  art. 
The  printer  has  also  been  very  unkind  in  shifting  on  the  description,  as  much  as 
ten  pages  divorced  from  the  illustrations,  so  that  the  reader  has  to  go  back  over 
more  than  twenty  figures  to  find  what  is  described. 

Some  of  the  dicta  are  surprising,  and  may,  we  hope,  be  reconsidered  for  the 
next  edition.  The  stele  of  King  Zet,  or  more  correctly  Uaz  (for  such  is  the  reading 
of  the  serpent  in  the  Xth  Nome)  is  more  than  half  attributed  by  its  style  to  Sety  I ; 
but  the  hawk  upon  it  could  havoc  all  the  tame  hawks  of  Sety  into  mincemeat. 
Enamels  are  spoken  of  in  the  Dahshur  jewellery,  which  is  entirely  of  inlays.  The 
Meydum  Pyramid  is  stated  to  be  a  natural  hill,  whereas  it  is  all  built  down  to  below 
the  pavement  level.  The  temple  of  Sety  at  Abydos  is  stated  to  be  partly  in  the  hill, 
while  there  is  no  hill  near  it.  The  English  work  is  kindly  referred  to  in  the  text, 
but  has  suffered  in  the  illustrations.  Fig.  14  is  not  the  plan  of  Bet  Khallaf  by 
Garstang,  but  the  tomb  of  Qa  at  Abydos,  planned  by  H.  Flinders  Petrie.  Fig.  17 
is  by  Green,  not  Quibell.  Fig.  108  is  from  Paget  and  Pirie,  PI.  XXXVI.  Fig.  194, 
"after  Champollion,"  is  from  Beni  Hasan,  I,  XXVII.  Figs.  277,  290,  are 
unacknowledged  from  Petrie's  Tell  el  Amarna.  Figs.  334,  388,  476,  are  all  taken 
unacknowledged  from  Petrie's  Arts  and  Crafts,  a  book  which  never  appears  in  the 
very  full  bibliographies,  though  other  works,  two  years  later,  are  inserted.  Such  are 
the  spots  on  the  sun. 

In  Prof  Jt^quier's  work  we  meet  with  a  refreshing  aim.  "  Hitherto  the  tendency 
of  certain  works  has  been  to  insist  on  the  general  character,  to  seek  to  present 
a  homogeneous  whole  more  than  the  differences  between  periods  .  .  .  The  aim  of 
this  little  book  is  to  counteract  these  erroneous  ideas,  and  to  study  successively  all 
the  main  stages  of  the  Egyptian  civilisation."  To  this  end  the  chapters  are  clearly 
arranged  in  periods,  systematically  treating  the  history,  monuments,  and  civilisation 
of  each  period.  The  work  is  admirably  analysed  in  tables,  unfortunately  all 
placed  at  the  end ;  it  has  a  long  and  full  table  of  contents,  complete  list  of  the 
264  illustrations  ;  an  ample  bibliography,  classified  under  some  two  dozen  divisions  ; 
and  a  full  index.  The  aid  of  material  arrangement  is  most  helpful,  and  gratifying 
after  the  lack  of  such  necessary  construction  in  other  books. 

The  illustrations  are  happily  larger  than  Hachette's,  but  less  fine  (screen  1 50). 
They  are  scrupulously  correct  as  to  their  sources,  and  well  chosen  for  variety. 
The  text  is  clear  and  careful  in  its  expression ;  though  one  misses  the  touches  of 
esprit  which  lighten  the  pages  of  the  previous  work.  One  may  hope  that  the  author 
will  reconsider  a  few  matters.     The  paintings  of  the  pre-historic  boats  might  be 

F  4 


88  Reviews. 

thought  safely  settled  to  be  such  after  publishing  the  Hierakonpolis  paintings, 
which  show  the  great  steering-oar,  with  the  steersman  holding  it ;  the  interpretation 
as  a  village  seems  entirely  forced  and  impossible.  The  tying-up  rope  is  also 
shown  hanging  in  front ;  and  on  a  vase  (Ancient  Egypt,  p.  34)  are  men  punting 
with  long  poles  pushed  from  the  shoulders.  The  division  into  two  periods  of 
first  and  second  prehistoric  civilisation  is  not  noted,  although  the  distinctions 
between  the  two  are  very  marked.  The  Elamite  connection  of  the  dynastic 
invaders  is  dismissed  in  favour  of  a  Nubian  origin  ;  but  the  very  close  resemblance 
of  the  style  of  animal  figures  on  the  cylinder-seals  from  Susa  and  Abydos  cannot 
be  ignored  in  this  way.  The  African  affinities — which  are  numerous — may  all 
be  due  to  the  earlier  people,  or  to  the  Sudany  invasion  of  the  Ilird  dynasty. 
Sneferu  should  surely  be  put  in  the  end  of  the  Ilird  dynasty;  and  the  Xllth 
dynasty  figure  175  is  of  the  deceased,  and  not  an  ushabti  slave  figure.  Fig.  215 
is  certainly  not  Apries,  and,  by  the  style  of  the  group  of  sculptures  to  which  it 
belongs,  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  Saite  Period.  Such  matters  are  but  small, 
and  the  whole  style  of  the  work  and  its  arrangement  may  we  hope  render  the 
view  of  the  changing  civilisations  familiar  to  French  readers,  and  be  followed' 
with  advantage  on  this  side  of  the  Channel. 

Freiherr  von  Hissing's  work  is  of  a  very  different  character  to  the  others.  The 
structure  of  society  and  the  literature  are  what  he  seeks  to  impress  on  the  German 
reader,  60  pages  out  of  84  being  given  to  these  heads.  Probably  no  one  west 
of  the  Rhine  would  respect  the  shell  of  officialism  so  much,  but  administration 
is  sweet  to  the  Teuton,  and  the  author  wisely  knows  how  to  meet  his  taste.  As 
the  book  covers  more  ground  than  the  others,  though  it  is  shorter,  it  necessarily 
treats  subjects  more  in  outline.  The  account  of  the  literature  is,  however,  very 
full  in  proportion,  hardly  any  well-known  writings  being  passed  over.  We  might 
have  hoped  that  the  author  of  the  most  magnificent  publication  of  the  art  would 
have  treated  it  more  fully  in  a  handbook,  but  probably  the  inexorable  publisher 
would  not  illustrate  it.  A  welcome  feature  of  the  illustrations  given  is  that  nearly 
half  are  from  the  collection  of  the  author,  and  therefore  are  of  new  material  not 
already  familiar. 

Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin,  66.  Nov.  191 3.  14  pp.,  22  figs.  10  cents. 
Boston. 

Occasionally  a  welcome  outline  of  some  of  Dr.  Reisner's  work  appears  in  the 
bi-monthly  Bulletin  from  Boston  ;  in  the  lack  of  any  more  satisfying  record  of  this 
great  mass  of  work,  we  may  be  thankful  for  such  a  publication.  This  number 
contains  the  account  of  clearing  a  group  of  family  tombs  at  Gizeh,  one  of  which 
was  quite  untouched.  These  were  of  three  generations  of  architects,  who  lived 
under  Assa,  Unas,  Tela,  Pepy  I  and  Pepy  II,  the  close  of  the  Vth  and  first  half 
of  the  Vlth  dynasty.  The  persons  were:  Anta  Snezem-ab  under  Assa,  Mehy  and 
Khum-enta  under  Unas  and  Teta,  Nekhebuau  under  Pepy  I,  and  Im-thepy  under 
Pepy  II. 

T,he  tomb  of  Anta  contained  a  granite  sarcophagus ;  it  had  been  plundered, 
but  the  body  lay  complete.  In  pits  of  offerings  near  by,  were  limestone  cases  for 
meat  offerings,  copper  tools  and  models,  and  a  beautiful  diorite  cup  inscribed  with 
the  name  of  Teta,  showing  the  date  of  the  burial. 

In  the  court  of  Nekhebuau  were  many  inscribed  and  sculptured  stones  which 
could  be  refitted.  These  give  biographical  details  of  his  employment  over  various 
public  works.     He  was  six  years  directing  great  works  in  Heliopolis,  and  rose  to 


Reviews.  89 

be  chief  architect.     He  also  went  to  Sinai,  where  he  left  an  inscription  of  his 
expedition  at  Maghareh. 

The  latest  of  these  tombs  was  undisturbed.  The  sloping  passage  was  blocked 
up  solid  with  twenty-five  feet  length  of  stone.  After  breaking  and  withdrawing 
this,  the  burial  was  found  perfect.  Outside  of  the  long  box  coffin  lay  a  pile  of 
copper  models  of  tables,  with  little  vases  on  them,  and  many  copper  bowls  and 
libation  vases  with  long  spouts.  It  is  a  most  valuable  series  for  dating  the  types  of 
the  latter  part  of  the  Vlth  dynasty.  Inside  the  coffin  lay  the  body,  badly 
mummified,  with  an  alabaster  head-rest,  two  alabaster  jars,  a  copper  mirror,  and 
a  deep  collar  of  bead  work  of  gold  and  faience  beads.  In  the  ruins  of  a  chapel  was 
found  a  wooden  statue,  of  good  work,  well  preserved. 

Das  grab  des  Ti. — By  Georg  Steindorff.  4to,  12  pp.,  143  phot, 
plates,  20  drawn  plates.     191 3.     (Hinrichs,  Leipzig.) 

This  magnificent  volume  at  last  rewards  us  for  waiting  half-a-century  for  the 
publication  of  the  most  celebrated  of  the  great  tombs  of  Saqqareh.  It  is  worthily 
reproduced,  and  Prof  Steindorff  is  to  be  congratulated  on  the  clearness  and  good 
effect  of  this  grand  series  of  photographs  of  the  whole  walls,  in  this  immense  picture- 
book  of  early  Egyptian  life.  He  has  judiciously  taken  a  white  paper,  which  much 
increases  the  visibility  of  detail  beyond  that  of  the  other  large  issues  of  tombs,  such 
as  Kaqemni  and  the  Rue  de  Tombeaux.  There  is  something  still  to  be  gained  by 
a  yet  whiter  and  denser  paper.  We  hope  that  a  second  volume  will  give  us  the 
other  facilities  that  appeared  in  the  "  Mastaba  of  Kaqemni  "  ;  there  is  yet  lacking 
the  outline  key  drawings  to  the  walls,  the  enlarged  drawings  of  details,  and  the 
discussion  and  translation  of  the  short  inscriptions  which  are  so  generally  neglected. 

Archaeology  of  the  Old  Testament.  By  Dr.  Edouard  Naville.  8vo, 
212  pp.     5j.     1913.     (Robt.  Scott.) 

The  essential  thesis  of  this  book  is  that  the  greater  part  of  the  Old  Testament 
was  written  in  cuneiform  character,  until  it  was  translated  into  Aramaic  by  Ezra. 
The  principal  reason  assigned  for  this  view  is  the  prevalence  of  cuneiform  writing 
in  Palestine,  shown  by  the  Tell  Amarna  letters,  and  the  tablets  found  at  Taanach 
and  Gezer  which  refer  to  ordinary  business.  All  of  these,  however,  belong  to  the 
Canaanite  population,  and  when  we  look  at  the  Jewish  and  kindred  people  we  see 
the  Siloam  inscription  showing  a  long  past  of  cursive  writing,  the  Sumerian  ostraka, 
the  long  inscription  of  Mesha,  and  the  still  earlier  cursive  writing  at  Serabit.  It  is 
true  the  Canaanite  habit  may  have  been  to  use  cuneiform,  yet  Prof  Naville  seems 
to  attach  too  little  importance  to  the  e.xamples  of  writing  of  the  Semitic  races. 
His  view  is  the  older  one  of  the  prevalence  of  a  pure  Phoenician  script  from  which 
other  alphabets  are  a  degradation  ;  and  he  does  not  treat  alphabetic  writing  on  the 
same  basis  which  he  rightly  insists  upon  for  language — namely,  that  the  varieties 
and  dialects  are  all  of  equal  human  value,  although  one  may  have  become  a  literary 
standard. 

It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  origination  of  Genesis  and  other  writings  in  short 
separate  documents,  is  an  evidence  for  cuneiform  writing  rather  than  alphabetic 
or  hieratic  ;  or  why  Moses  should  be  supposed  to  have  been  taught  cuneiform  in 
Egypt,  rather  than  the  all-prevalent  hieratic,  which  was  in  use  among  all  classes 
down  to  the  common  workman. 

Matters  where  there  will  be  a  more  general  agreement  with  the  author  are  his 
outline  of  the  Exodus  movement,  his  excellent  connection  of  "  the  land  of  Egypt  as 


go  Reviews. 

thou  goest  unto  Zoar "  with  the  fertile  Delta  unto  Zar  the  eastern  frontier  town, 
and  his  deduction  about  the  worship  from  the  Aswan  papyri  long  before  any- 
possible  influence  of  Ezra  and  the  Babylonian  party.  Though  this  work  is  primarily 
concerned  with  the  Palestinian  writings,  it  touches  Egypt  so  largely  that  it  claims 
our  attention  here. 

TAe  Ancient  History  of  the  Near  East. — By  H.  R.  Hall.  8vo,  602  pp., 
33  plates,  14  maps.     15J.     1913.     (Methuen.) 

The  purpose  of  this  volume  is  to  widen  the  view  of  the  University  scholar,  and 
give  him  a  direct  acquaintance  with  that  greater  world,  which  he  first  learns 
something  about  from  Herodotus.  For  this  purpose  it  opens  with  a  general  survey 
of  the  position  of  modern  study,  and  then  develops  the  pre-historic  Greek  world, 
to  break  in  the  student  to  the  idea  of  remote  ages.  After  this  it  is  allowable  to 
launch  fully  into  Egyptian  and  Babylonian  history,  taking  them  together  in  three 
main  periods,  early,  middle  and  late.  The  Hittite,  Syrian,  and  Palestine  history 
also  come  in  for  full  notice,  so  that  the  student  will  be  fairly  set  on  his  feet  as  to  all 
the  changes  of  the  near  East  before  the  Hellenic  age. 

There  are,  of  course,  many  points  on  which  the  author  has  to  take  one  side  of 
a  disputed  position ;  and  in  most  of  these  he  represents  the  more  moderate  and 
reasonable  view.  Musri  is  taken  as  being  Egypt.  The  long  reigns  and 
importance  of  the  Hyksos  are  not  suppressed,  as  has  been  fashionable  lately. 
Manetho  is  respected  as  a  careful  writer,  though  sometimes  in  error,  and  often 
corrupted.  The  treatment  of  the  Amarna  letters  strongly  leans  to  accepting  the 
Khabiri  as  Hebrews,  and  the  Exodus  is  put  in  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos.  This, 
however,  ignores  the  place-name  Raamses  in  Exodus,  and  the  record  of  four 
centuries  of  oppression.  It  seems  more  likely  that  there  was  a  partial  e.xodus  along 
with  the  Hyksos,  the  Hebrews  perhaps  appearing  as  the  Khabiri,  and  the  Israel  of 
Merneptah  ;  while  the  Exodus  record  refers  to  the  remainder  of  the  Israelites  leaving 
under  the  XlXth  dynasty.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the  chronology  concordantly 
recorded  by  the  Turin  papyrus,  Manetho,  and  Herodotus  is  rejected  solely  on 
grounds  of  style,  which  have  no  value  in  proving  periods  of  time.  Definite  records 
cannot  be  treated  so  lightly.  It  is  a  little  curious  that  the  long  labours  of  the 
Research  Account  and  British  School  are  entirely  omitted,  while  reciting  single 
volumes  of  various  other  writers  on  excavations. 

As  a  whole  the  book  is  of  great  value  in  putting  a  complex  mass  of  syn- 
chronous history  into  an  accessible  form,  and  not  ignoring  differences  of  opinion 
where  such  uncertainties  occur. 

Les  Inscriptions  hi&oglyphiqttes  et  hieratiques  du  Otiddi  Hammdm&t. — By 
J.  COUYAT  and  P.  MONTET  (Mem.  Inst.  Fran.  Arch.  Orient).  4to,  119  pp. 
(plates  to  appear  in  2nd  volume). 

This  volume  opens  with  a  general  account  of  the  inscriptions  of  each  great 
period.  Some  interesting  lists  of  peculiar  orthography  are  given.  The  inscriptions 
left  by  the  various  quarrying  parties,  on  the  rocks,  are  then  transcribed,  in  their 
geographical  order,  266  in  all,  with  notes  and  some  discussion.  It  would  have  been 
most  desirable  to  state  the  nature  of  the  rock  on  which  each  is  inscribed,  and  the 
nature  of  the  rock  in  the  nearest  quarry,  as  a  guide  to  the  localities  of  the  stones 
used  in  each  period. 

An  interesting  question,  which  has  not  been  touched  on  by  the  authors,  is 
that  of  the  seasonal  dates  of  the  inscriptions,  as  showing  at  what  times  of  year  the 


Reviews. 


9% 


quarry  expeditions  worked.  We  shall  here  follow  the  dating  in  "  Historical 
Studies";  and  as  the  Egyptians'  chronology  and  that  of  Berlin  differ  by  an  entire 
Sothis  period,  the  seasons  would  be  the  same  on  either  chronology.  The  following 
are  the  dated  inscriptions  : — 


Page. 

King. 

Year. 

Month. 

Day. 

Season. 

97 

Aty     ' 

I 

4 

2 

August  14 

74 

Pepyl 

18 

I  I 

27 

April  I 

79 

Mentuhotep  II.. 

2 

2 

15 

End  of  February 

97 

» 

2 

2 

23 

n 

98 

>» 

2 

2 

25 

)i 

81 

Sankhkara 

8 

9 

3 

July  6 

85 

Senusert  I 

.        16 

3 

— 

Jan.  22-Feb.  22 

64 

>> 

•       38 

4 

4 

February  21 

72 

Senusert  II 

II 

4 

8 

February  14 

49 

Senusert  III 

•       14 

4 

16 

February  15 

48 

Amenemhat  III 

2 

3 

I 

December  27 

70 

»• 

3 

3 

13 

January  9 

SI 

H 

19 

S 

15 

March  7 

47 

»» 

20 

3 

13 

January  5 

112 

Ramessu  IV     . 

2 

2 

2 

July  I 

108 

j» 

3 

9 

26 

February  18 

108 

»> 

3 

10 

— 

Feb.  23-Mar.  23 

41 

Darius  I 

.       26 

10 

10 

October  24 

67 

»» 

.       26 

12 

— 

Nov.  13-Dec.  13 

100 

11 

•       27 

3 

— 

Feb.  14-Mar.  16 

87 

11 

.       28 

9 

II 

August  25 

96-7 

i> 

•       30 

8 

15 

July  30 

52 

Xerxes  ... 

2 

I 

19 

January  4 

43 

Nekhtnebf 

3 

4 

— 

Feb.  i6-Mar.  16 

It  appe 

ars  that  there  we 

re  two  c 

luarryin 

g  seasons 

,    the  main  one  between 

December  13  and  April  i  (15  examples),  the  lesser  one  between  July  i  and 
October  24  (6  examples).  The  main  season  was  for  convenience  of  the  work  in  the 
cool  weather ;  the  lesser  season  when  labour  was  at  liberty  during  the  inundation. 
The  hot  season  work  was  more  usual  in  late  times. 


Amulets,  Illustrated  by  the  Egyptian  Collection  in  University  College,  London. — 
By  W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie.  4to,  58  pp.,  47  photo,  plates,  7  drawn  plates. 
2 1  J.     (Constable.) 

(Where  books  are  in  any  way  connected  with  the  British  School,  a  brief 
summary  of  such  will  be  given  without  any  opinions.) 

This  begins  with  a  discussion  of  the  principles  of  the  use  of  amulets,  and  their 
meaning.  The  Egyptian  amulets  are  divided  into  five  classes :  Similars  which 
resemble  the  parts  of  the  body  to  be  protected  ;  Amulets  of  Powers  which  are 
emblems  of  abstract  powers  ;  Amulets  of  Property,  which  imitate  the  offerings  for 
the  dead  ;  Protective  Amulets  for  defending  the  person  or  the  mummy  ;  Amulets 
of  gods,  human  or  animal. 

Each  of  the  275  different  kinds  of  amulet  is  then  described,  arranged  in  these 
successive  classes.  First  is  stated  the  ancient  name ;  then  the  meaning  of  the 
amulet ;  the  period  of  use ;  a  list  of  the  examples  photographed  ;  a  list  of  all 
published  examples  of  the  materials  used ;  the  positions  known  on  the  mummy ; 


92  Revinvs. 

lastly,  the  number  of  examples  in  published  collections.  This  book  thus 
summarises  what  is  known  on  the  subject  of  each  amulet,  beside  describing  the 
specimens  at  University  College,  which  has  the  most  complete  collection. 

The  plates  contain  full-size  photographs  of  about  1,700  amulets,  also  copies  of 
two  ancient  lists  of  amulets,  drawings  of  the  largest  gnostic  amulet,  and  plans  of 
the  positions  of  amulets  on  twenty-four  mummies.  It  is  intended  to  follow  this 
volume  with  others,  similarly  discussing  various  branches  of  Egyptian  antiquities. 

Paganism  and  Christianity  in  Egypt. — By  P.  D.  SCOTT-MONCRIEFF.  8vo, 
225  pp.     6s.     (Cambridge  University  Press.) 

This  is  a  valuable  handbook,  collecting  and  discussing  material  from  very 
different  sources,  though  not  adding  new  facts.  The  chapters  deal  with  the  late 
phases  of  Egyptian  religion,  the  Christian  literature  of  the  early  centuries.  Christian 
mummifying  and  burials,  the  very  debatable  amount  of  Christian  influence  on 
sculpture,  a  summary  of  the  Gnostic  books,  and  an  outline  of  the  rise  of  monasticism. 
The  lamented  death  of  the  author  has  left  the  close  of  the  work  incomplete,  but 
what  we  have  here  will  serve  as  a  guide  book  to  students,  and  a  sufficient  outline 
for  the  general  reader. 

In  some  directions  there  are  unfortunate  omissions.  The  Hermetic  books  are 
never  mentioned ;  yet  with  their  internal  dating  to  the  Persian  age,  they  give 
a  priceless  view  of  the  spread  of  ideas,  symbols  and  expressions,  in  pre-Christian 
times.  Christianity  is  hardly  credited  before  180  A.D.  in  Egypt :  but  it  is  impossible, 
with  the  strongly  Jewish  Delta  close  to  Palestine,  that  it  should  not  have  received 
Christianity  as  early  as  Antioch,  42  A.D.,  and  long  before  there  was  a  body  of 
Christians  martyred  in  Rome  in  64  A.D.  The  certain  introduction  of  Medians  under 
the  Persian  rule  into  the  Mediterranean  area  is  ignored.  The  connection  of  Osiris 
with  corn  is  classed  as  being  only  of  late  date ;  but  the  distribution  of  the  cities 
where  the  corn-festival  took  place  points  to  its  being  prehistoric,  before  the  nome 
system  was  completed. 

Synthetic  Studies  in  Scripture. — By  W.  Shaw  Caldecott.  Crown  Svo. 
181  pp.     2s.6d.     (Scott.) 

It  is  unfortunate  that  anyone  at  the  present  day  should  confuse  readers  by 
statements  in  defiance  of  fundamental  documents,  known  for  half  a  century.  To 
state  that  "  Shepherd  kings  belonged  to  the  XVI  Ith  and  XVIIIth  dynasties,"  and 
proceed  to  treat  Akhenaten  and  all  his  ancestors  as  Hyksos,  is  directly  contradicted 
by  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos  under  Aohmes,  and  all  the  tenor  of  his  successors. 
To  state  that  "  there  are  few  subjects  such  as  high  priests,  royal  nurses,  court  dwarfs, 
and  the  like,  who  are  not  known  by  several  personal  appellations  "  is  quite  untrue, 
and  is  invented  to  identify  Joseph  with  Amenhetep,  son  of  Hapy.  The  census  lists 
of  Numbers  are  cut  down  to  a  tenth  without  any  trace  of  evidence,  and  regardless 
of  the  strong  internal  evidence  that  the  hundreds  are  independent  of  the  misunder- 
stood thousands.  The  suggestions  of  this  writer  need  to  be  tested  by  a  wider 
reading  and  judgment. 


(     93     ) 

NOTES   AND    NEWS. 


Great  changes  are  in  progress  among  the  staff  of  the  Antiquity  Department  in 
Egypt.  Brugsch  Pasha,  whose  service  dates  from  the  days  of  Mariette,  has  now 
retired ;  he  will  be  sficceeded  in  the  curatorship  of  the  Cairo  Museum  by  Mr.  J.  E. 
Quibell,  who  worked  for  some  years  with  the  Egyptian  Research  Account. 
Mr,  Weigall,  who  is  at  present  Inspector-General  of  Antiquities  in  Cairo,  will  retire 
after  the  coming  summer  ;  his  seven  or  eight  years'  service  in  Upper  Egypt  having 
made  too  much  strain  on  his  health.  Mr.  Cecil  Firth  has  been  appointed  as 
Inspector  at  Luqsor,  but  will  be  transferred  to  succeed  Mr.  Quibell  at  Saqqareh. 
M.  Daressy  has  been  transferred  from  the  curatorship  of  the  upper  floor  of  the 
Museum  to  the  administrative  position  of  Controller.  Above  all  this  looms  the 
impending  retirement  of  the  master-mind  :  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  will  probably 
before  long  leave  his  Directorship,  which  he  first  entered  on  thirty-four  years  ago. 

Decorations  in  Egyptology  are  almost  unknown,  but  the  Emperor  of  Austria 
has  conferred  on  Mr.  Weigall  the  Cross  of  the  Order  of  Franz-Joseph,  for  services 
to  science. 

Mr.  Quibell  is  concluding  his  Saqqareh  work  before  entering  on  the  Museum 
duties.  He  has  lately  found  a  cofifin  with  boats  and  model  workshops,  of  the 
Middle  Kingdom  period. 

Dr.  Reisner's  programme  this  year  includes  work  at  the  Gizeh  Pyramid 
cemetery  with  Mr.  Howe  all  the  season  ;  work  at  El-Bersheh  for  the  latter  part  of  the 
season  by  Mr.  West;  excavations  at  Sesi  (Delgo)  in  Haifa  Province  in  the  first  months 
of  the  year  by  Dr.  Reisner  ;  also  work  by  Mr.  West  early  in  the  season  at  Kerma 
in  Dongola  Province.  Mr.  Clarence  Fisher,  well  known  from  his  plans  of  Nippur, 
has  returned  to  America  for  museum  work,  but  will  be  back  in  Egypt  by  April. 

From  Antinoe  Mr.  J.  de  M.  Johnson  writes  :  "  After  several  years  of  excavation 
for  papyrus  cartonnage  the  Graeco-Roman  branch  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund 
has  this  year  again  turned  its  attention  to  the  Roman  Period  in  undertaking  work 
on  the  rubbish  mounds  of  Antinoe.  It  is  difficult  at  present  to  estimate  the  value 
of  the  results.  The  mounds  are  without  any  top  layers  of  Arabic,  and  are  uniformly 
dry  to  the  ground  level.  On  the  other  hand  the  necessary  strata  of  dfsh  are  scarce, 
and  papyrus  when  found  tends  to  be  extremely  brittle  and  decayed." 

From  Prof.  Naville's  work  at  Abydos  all  detailed  statements  are  reserved 
for  the  present. 

At  Lisht  Mr.  Mace  has  cleared  a  large  area  south  of  the  pyramid  of  Amenem- 
hat ;  he  has  found  numberless  pits,  mostly  of  the  close  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  and 
parts  of  mastabas  which  were  pulled  to  pieces  during  the  later  Empire.  The  water 
level  is  a  difficulty  in  the  larger  pits,  and  pumping  is  requisite. 

At  Thebes  the  great  work  of  Mr.  Robert  Mond  on  the  tombs  is  progressing  in 
the  hands  of  Mr.  Mackay.  He  has  photographed  the  tomb  of  Queen  Nefertari,  and 
is  repairing  the  tombs  of  the  Engravers  (i8i),  of  Dedy  (200),  of  Kha-em-hat  (57) 
where  casts  of  the  missing  parts  now  at  Berlin  are  being  inserted,  and  the  fine  tomb 
of  Menna  (69).  Also  tombs  1 1 1  and  139  have  had  the  walls  treated,  and  the  open 
tombs  at  Drah  abul  Negga  are  being  tended. 

At  Aswan  Prof.  Schiaparelli  is  clearing  tombs  on  the  western  side.  One  tomb 
which  he  has  opened  was  rifled  in  Ptolemaic  times ;  the  rock  staircase  of  another 
tomb  is  being  cleared,  and  may  lead  to  a  fine  monument ;  this  is  just  below  the 
Coptic  monastery. 

Prof  Steindorff  is  working  at  Ibrim  in  Nubia  before  taking  up  Hawara  later  in 
the  season. 


(    94    ) 


THE  EGYPTIAN  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

Our  Founder,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  informs  me  that  many  of  the  branches  of  this 
Association  have  enlarged  their  bounds  considerably  during  the  last  two  years. 
The  Local  Honorary  Secretaries  are  much  to  be  congratulated  on  the  results  of 
their  labours.  In  many  of  the  centres,  the  members  are  real  students,  and  require 
very  little  help  in  providing  material  for  their  meetings  ;  others,  however,  need 
considerable  assistance,  which  is  always  gladly  given  from  headquarters.  One  very 
popular  series  of  papers  sent  round,  during  last  winter,  dealt  with  "  Domestic  Life 
in  Ancient  Egypt,"  comprising  sculpture,  painting,  arts  and  crafts,  architecture 
(religious  and  domestic),  and  dress.  Another,  almost  equally  sought  after,  was  on 
"  The  Foreign  Neighbours  of  Egypt,"  Syrians,  Cretans,  Hittites,  etc.  A  very  small 
minority  of  branches  have  suffered  from  temporary  diminution,  or  eclipse ;  for  the 
most  part,  they  are  gradually  growing  larger.  Some  desire  to  keep  a  fixed  limit  of 
membership,  as  the  members  meet  in  a  private  drawing  room ;  others  are  actively 
promoting  increase  of  membership.  All  are  furthering  the  interests  they  have  at 
heart,  by  serious  pursuance  of  the  subject  under  various  aspects,  and  the  standard 
attained  in  papers  and  lectures  has  distinctly  risen  in  the  last  few  years. 

The  papers  for  the  present  season  are  given  below,  in  continuation  of  our  list 
in  the  January  number. 

London.  (Hon.  Sec,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  i8,  Bedford  Square,  W.C.) — Meetings,  monthly. 
At  8  p.m.,  tea  and  coffee,  8.30  p.m.,  lecture.  March  26,  lecturer,  J.  G.  Milne.  April  23, 
Mrs.  Aitken,  on  "  The  Development  of  Egyptian  Art."  May  20,  or  other  Wednesday  afternoon,  at 
University  College,  3  p.m..  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie's  lantern-lecture  on  this  season's  New  Discoveries. 

Bournemouth.  (Miss  Horn,  Canford  Cliffs.)— Feb.  11, '3.15  p.m.  (tea,  4.15  p.m.)  at  Royal 
Bath  Hotel  (Mrs.  Johnson),  paper  on  "Period  of  Pyramid  Builders";  history  and  art  of  Illrd- 
Vlth  dynasties.  March  11,  3.15  p.m.  (tea,  4.15  p.m.)  at  Sherstone  Cottage,  Branksome  Park 
(Mrs.  Naesmyth  Webb),  paper  on  "Period  of  Pyramid  Builders." 

Edinburgh.  (Mrs.  Melville,  16,  Carlton  Street.)— Dec.  18,  3  p.m.,  Prof.  Kennedy,  D.D.,  on 
■"Israel  in  Egypt."  Jan.  30,  Mrs.  Aitken,  on  "The  Development  of  Egyptian  Art."  Feb.  28, 
Prof.  Stevenson,  D.Litt.,  on  "A  Story-teller  of  Fifth  Century  B.C." 

Farnham.     (D.  Hill  Cook,  Serendah,  Firgrove  Hill.)— Jan.  (.'),  lecturer  J.  G.  Milne. 

Glasgow.     (Miss  Bruce  Murray,  17,  University  Gardens.)~March  (?),  Evening  meeting. 

Gloucester.  (Miss  Ellis,  10,  Alexandra  Road.)— Papers  read  at  meetings,  and  distribution 
of  Journal. 

Hastings.  (Mrs.  Russell  Morris,  Quarry  Hill  Lodge,  St.  Leonards.)— Jan.  12,  Dr.  Spanton, 
on  "  The  Egyptian  Water  Lily."     March  and  April,  two  more  lectures. 

Reigate.  (Mrs.  Paul,  Hilton  Lodge.)— Jan.  27,  Miss  L.  Eckenstein  on  "  Mummies,"  also 
Feb.  23,  on  "  Amulets,"  also  March  24,  on  "  Dress,  Religious  and  Secular." 

Ross-on-Wye.  (Mrs.  Marshall,  Gayton  Hall.)— Dec.  31,  3  p.m.  (Mrs.  Cobbold)  Mrs.  Sefton- 
Jones'  paper  on  "  Recent  Excavations"  read  :  Jan.  28,  3  p.m.  (Mrs.  Schomberg)  Historical  Course 
continued,  IVth-VIth  dynasties.  Feb.  25,  Meeting  (Mrs.  Gray).  A  small  lending  library  on 
Egyptian  and  Ancient  History,  free  for  members'  use,  is  established  in  Ross. 

Tintagel.  (Mrs.  Harris,  St.  Piran's.)— Jan.  5,  paper  on  "  Eariy  dynasties  and  Pyramids." 
Feb.  2,  Lecture  on  Xllth  dynasty  given,  and  Flinders  Petrie's  letter  from  lUahun  read.  March 
or  April,  Prehistoric.     April  or  May,  paper  on  1913  Exhibition  of  British  School. 


Manchester.  Egyptian  and  Oriental  Society.  (Miss  W.  M.  Crompton,  The 
University.)— Open  meetings  at  University.  Jan.  14,  8  p.m.,  T.  Eric  Peet,  on  "  Sinai  as  known  to 
the  Egyptians."  Feb.  (?)  H.  R.  Hall,  on  "Greek  Monasteries."  Feb.  24,  Prof.  Lehmann-Haupt, 
on  "  Tigranokerta  Re-discovered"  (not  open).  March  10,  Prof.  A.  Dickie,  on  "  The  Origin  and 
Development  of  Building  amongst  the  Jews."  April  25,  A.  M.  Blackman,  on  "The  Painted 
Tombs  at  Meir."    May  (?),  W.  Burton,  on  "  Egyptian  Glazed  Ware." 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


(    95     ) 


THE   TOMB   OF   MENNA. 


This  tomb  is  one  of  the  best  preserved  at  Thebes,  owing  to  its  not  having  been 
exposed  to  modern  ravages.  It  was  found  in  the  work  of  Mr.  Robert  Mond,  who 
has  done  so  much  fortjie  safety  and  care  of  these  tombs,  hitherto  so  strangely  neglected 
by  the  Government  and  the  Societies  that  have  worked  at  Thebes.     The  painted 


Wife  and  Children  of  Menna  in  a  Boat. 


96  The  Tomb  of  Menna. 

chapels  at  the  southern  capital  are  hardly  secondary  in  value  and  interest  to  the 
great  sculptured  chapels  of  Saqqareh. 

In  the  frontispiece  is  a  harvest  scene  which  shows  how  the  Egyptian  could 
grasp  actions  in  his  memory,  and  reproduce  them  like  a  Japanese  j  for  we  cannot 
suppose  that  he  got  models  to  pose  for  all  these  lively  little  groups  in  action.  The 
Egyptian  always  cut  off  the  ears  of  corn  close,  and  left  the  straw  to  be  pulled  up 
afterwards  whole  and  sound.  The  two  men  are  carrying  off  a  net  full  of  ears  to  be 
threshed.  Below  them  amid  the  standing  straw  are  two  girls  fighting.  The  right- 
hand  one  (a)  has  evidently  been  kneeling  down  to  gather  up  the  ears  that  she  has 
gleaned  ;  the  other  girl  (b)  has  run  forward  to  dispute  her  right  to  them,  and  B  has 
seized  the  wrist  of  A  with  her  right  hand,  and  clutched  the  hair  of  A  in  her  left, 
A  retaliates  as  well  as  she  can  by  seizing  B's  hair  in  her  right.  So  far  \  is  checked, 
but  B  cannot  do  anything,  and  is  worsted  in  the  matter  of  hair-grip.  There  the 
squabble  has  waited  for  three  thousand  years. 

Beyond  is  a  sycomore  fig  tree,  which  casts  its  thick  shadow,  and  bears  its  tough 
fruit  close  to  its  branches.  A  boy  is  sitting  at  rest  on  a  stool,  while  another  boy 
plays  on  a  long  pipe,  like  a  modern  zamniareh,  not  a  flute  blown  sideways,  as  has 
been  described.  Over  his  head  hangs  a  water  skin,  hung  up  in  the  cool  shade  to 
evaporate,  and  give  a  cold  drink  ;  observe  that  the  neck  is  tied  back  separately,  so 
that  it  should  be  loosened  to  get  a  drink,  without  shifting  the  skin.  It  is  a  curious 
sign  of  the  comfort  of  the  times  that  boys  out  in  the  harvest  field  have  well- 
carpentered  stools  to  sit  upon,  and  do  not  lounge  as  best  they  can ;  certainly  no 
modern  Egyptian  would  think  of  such  a  luxury. 

In  the  lower  scene  are  two  more  little  gleaners.  One  has  a  thorn  in  her  foot ; 
so  she  has  seated  herself  on  her  gleaning  bag,  and  stretches  out  her  leg  for  her 
companion  to  remove  the  thorn.  The  friend's  gleaning  bag  lies  on  the  ground 
between  them,  just  such  a  bag  of  coarse  fibre  as  is  commonly  found  in  the  period  of 
the  New  Kingdom.  A  boy  is  stripping  the  heads  off  flax  stems  by  pulling  them 
through  a  forked  stick  fastened  to  the  ground.  The  general  well-being  of  the 
people  is  seen  by  the  gleaning  girls — the  poorest  people — wearing  a  long  maids 
down  to  the  ankles.  The  boys  and  men  naturally  only  wear  the  usual  waist-cloth. 
Both  the  men  and  one  of  the  boys,  however,  have  the  leather  net  over  it,  made  of 
slit  leather  work,  to  take  the  wear  of  sitting  and  rubbing  about. 

On  the  previous  page  is  a  part  of  a  scene  of  the  wife  and  daughters  in  a  boat 
with  Menna,  drawn  with  perfectly  unfaltering  and  even  lines.  Below,  the  ducks 
flutter  and  quack  in  the  lotus  pool  as  the  boat  advances ;  and  one  of  the  girls  leans 
over  the  side  to  pick  the  lotus  buds  as  they  pass. 

It  was  in  the  clearance  of  this  tomb  that  a  charming  statuette  was  found,  two 
views  of  which  are  here  given  as  the  Portraits  of  this  quarterly  part.  On  comparing 
the  profile  with  that  of  the  wife  in  the  boat  scene,  it  is  so  precisely  like  that  we 
must  see  in  this  figure  the  wife  of  Menna.  Why  is  her  face  perfectly  preserved 
while  not  a  trace  of  her  husband's  statue  is  to  be  found?  The  state  of  the  tomb 
shows  that  there  was  a  special  spite  against  him.  His  throwstick  in  the  picture  is 
cut  in  two  ;  his  figure  viewing  the  estate  has  the  eye  gouged  out  that  he  may  not 
see; 'the  measuring  rope  for  his  fields  has  the  knots  scraped  away;  his  hand  in 
spearing  the  fish  is  destroyed.  Yet  there  was  no  ill-will  to  his  gracious  wife,  her 
face  and  figure  remain  on  the  wall  and  in  the  statuette.  For  the  photographs  of  the 
figure  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Mond,  as  also  for  the  cast  of  the  figure  (which  is  now 
in  the  Cairo  Museum),  from  which  the  portrait  on  the  cover  is  taken.  The  tomb 
scenes  I  photographed  in  1909.  W.  M.  F.  P. 


<?' 


i 


WIFE    OF     MENNA,     CAIRO     MUSEUM. 


WIFE     OF    MENNA,     CAIRO     MUSEUM. 


'i^ 


PECTORAL     OF     SENUSERT     11   I 
PECTORAL    AND    ARMLETS     OF    AMENEMHAT 


l1 


ANCIENT   EGYPT. 


BRITISH    SCHOOL   OF   ARCHAEOLOGY   IN    EGYPT, 
THE   TREASURE   OF   LAHUN. 

In  the  previous  number  of  ANCIENT  Egypt  an  account  has  been  given  of  the 
principal  features  of  the  pyramid  of  Senusert  II  and  its  surrounding  constructions. 
We  now  turn  to  describe  the  greatest  discovery  of  the  year,  indeed  by  far  the  most 
valuable  group  that  has  ever  been  found  outside  of  the  Government  reserves. 

On  the  south  side  of  the  pyramid  of  Lahun,  four  large  shaft-tombs  were  found, 
doubtless  all  belonging  to  members  of  the  royal  family.  They  had  all  been  opened 
and  plundered,  probably  in  the  decadence  of  the  kingdom  before  the  Hyksos. 
They  had  then  been  left  open,  and  gradually  filled  up  with  dust,  and  mud  washed 
in  by  occasional  storms.  In  one  of  these  tombs  stood  a  granite  sarcophagus,  the 
massive  lid  of  which  had  been  partly  pushed  off"  and  the  edge  broken  away,  enough 
to  let  a  boy  in  to  clear  out  the  contents,  and  nothing  whatever  was  left  in  it.  The 
tomb  appeared  to  have  been  entirely  ransacked,  and  only  a  recess  at  the  side  of  the 
passage  remained  to  be  examined.  This  was  filled  with  hard  washed  mud  like  the 
rest  of  the  tomb,  and  nothing  could  look  less  promising.  The  trained  workman 
was  told  to  clear  it  out  and  finish  the  tomb. 

After  a  few  cuts  of  the  pick,  the  man  saw  some  tubular  beads  of  gold  appearing. 
He  at  once  removed  the  local  workers  who  were  about  him,  and  sent  word  to  the 
staff".  Mr.  Frost  was  at  liberty,  and  went  down  ;  after  taking  out  about  a  pound 
weight  of  gold  beads,  and  beginning  to  uncover  the  band  of  the  diadem,  he  fetched 
Mr.  Brunton  to  come  down  and  continue  the  clearing.  The  rest  of  the  afternoon 
— loth  February — and  on  up  to  midnight,  the  clearing  went  on,  without  even 
extracting  the  diadem,  as  the  ground  was  so  hard.  Mr.  Brunton  slept  in  the  tomb, 
and  worked  at  intervals  during  the  night,  removing  the  diadem  safely  next  morning. 
For  five  days,  and  several  evenings  also,  Mr.  Brunton,  with  sometimes  Mr.  Willey, 
steadily  worked  through  the  cubic  yard  of  hard  mud,  every  scrap  of  which  had  to 
be  loosened  most  carefully  as  the  jewellery  and  ivory  work  were  scattered  throughout 
it,  and  a  single  rough  cut  might  do  great  damage.  After  that  work,  the  whole  of 
the  earth  was  brought  up  to  the  huts,  and,  for  some  weeks  sifting  went  on  gradually 
and  thoroughly,  and  all  the  richer  portions  were  completely  washed  away  as  liquid 
mud,  leaving  the  most  minute  beads  behind.  Thus  over  ten  thousand  beads  were 
recovered. 

Such  a  discovery  would  have  raised  a  hornet's  nest  of  dealers  and  robbers 
about  us,  if  it  were  known  while  we  were  at  work.  But  steps  may-  be  taken  to 
secure  the  silence  of  the  workman,  without  recourse  to  the  ancient  practice  of 
killing  all  who  knew  a  secret.  The  power  of  the  purse  in  our  regular  system  of 
reward  was  enough,  and  not  even  the  man's  own  brother  could  find  what  the  reward 
had  been.  So  far  as  rumours  reached  Egypt,  their  nature  showed  that  they  were 
due  to  the  betrayal  of  confidences  in  another  country,  and  not  to  anyone  in  Egypt. 

G 


98  The  Treasure  of  Lahun. 

(i)  The  principal  object  was  the  diadem,  bearing  the  royal  uraeus  on  the  front. 
It  is  formed  by  a  broad  band  of  highly  burnished  gold  over  an  inch  wide,  and  large 
enough  to  pass  round  the  bushy  wig  worn  in  the  Xllth  dynasty.  The  uraeus  is  of 
open  work,  inlaid  with  lazuli  and  carnelian  ;  the  head  is  of  lazuli,  which  was  found 
loose  in  the  mud.  In  washing  the  mud  we  recovered  one  of  the  minute  eyes  of 
garnet,  and  also  the  little  ring  of  gold  which  surrounded  it,  and  thus  the  head  was 
completed  again.  Around  the  polished  band  were  affixed  fifteen  rosettes,  each 
composed  of  four  flowers  with  intermediate  buds.  At  the  back  a  tube  of  gold  was 
riveted  on  to  the  band,  and  into  that  fitted  a  double  plume  of  sheet  gold,  the  stem 
of  which  slipped  through  a  flower  of  solid  gold.  The  thickness  of  the  plumes  was 
such  that  they  would  wave  slightly  with  every  movement  of  the  head.  At  the  back 
and  sides  of  the  crown  were  streamers  of  gold,  which  hung  from  hinges  attached  to 
the  rosettes.  The  whole  construction  was  over  a  foot  and  a  half  high.  The  crowns 
found  before  at  Dahshur  are  of  designs  different  from  this,  which  shows  a 
reminiscence  of  the  head-band  or  diadem  painted  on  the  figure  of  the  princess 
Nefert,  at  the  close  of  the  Ilird  dynasty,  or  the  silver  crown  of  the  Xlth  dynasty 
at  Leyden.  It  preserves,  therefore,  the  earlier  style  of  the  Old  Kingdom.  The 
plumes  and  streamers  were  found  laid  flat  together  beneath  the  circular  band  ;  they 
seem  to  have  been  carefully  placed  in  this  manner  originally. 

(2,  3)  Two  pectorals  of  the  same  design  were  found ;  one  with  the  cartouche 
of  Senusert  II,  belonging  to  the  princess  when  young,  the  other  of  Amenemhat  III, 
twenty  or  thirty  years  later.  The  cartouche  is  supported  by  the  kneeling  man, 
holding  palm  branches  which  rest  on  the  tadpole  representing  millions  of  years. 
This  group  is  flanked  by  two  falcons  whose  backs  form  the  outline  of  the  group. 
The  earlier  pectoral  is  inlaid  with  minute  feathering  of  lazuli  and  turquoise;  the 
later  with  a  different  feathering  of  lazuli  and  white  paste,  which  has  probably 
been  green.  The  gold  backs  of  the  pectorals  are  finely  engraved,  with  most  detail 
on  that  of  Senusert  II.  The  outlines  of  these,  formed  by  the  hawks,  are  more 
graceful  than  the  square  frames  of  the  Dahshur  pectorals.  They  were  probably 
suspended  by  necklaces  of  the  very  rich  deep  amethyst  beads  which  were  found 
here.     See  the  frontispiece  showing  the  engraved  gold  backs  of  the  pectorals. 

(4)  A  massive  collar  was  composed  of  large  gold  double  lion-heads,  one  of 
which  is  made  in  two  halves,  sliding  together  to  serve  as  a  fastener.  Between  these 
came  smaller  quadruple  lion-heads,  as  the  threading  holes  are  just  the  same 
distance  apart,  and  the  number  (7)  is  the  same. 

(5)  Another  collar  was  of  large  gold  cowries,  one  of  which  is  in  two  halves 
sliding  together,  and  therefore  separate  from  the  lion-heads.  Some  extra  spacing 
is  needed  between  these,  and  the  double  rhomb  beads  of  gold  have  threading  holes 
the  same  distance  apart,  while  their  number  (16)  is  just  double  that  of  the  cowries. 
These  probably  go  together. 

(6)  A  third  collar  was  of  the  old  type  of  long  pendant  or  drop  beads,  of  gold, 
lazuli,  carnelian,  and  amazon-stone.  The  only  beads  which  can  have  been  placed 
between  these  are  the  rhombic  beads  of  carnelian  and  blue  amazon-stone,  and  these 
cannot  have  been  threaded  with  the  rhombic  gold  beads  as  they  are  too  wide  to  fit 
those. 

(7)  Another  necklet  was  a  double  row  ot  amethyst  beads,  with  two  gold  lion- 
claw  pendants.  This  combination  is  suggested  by  the  double  beads  of  gold  balls 
soldered  to  the  claws,  of  the  same  size  as  the  amethysts. 

(8)  A  pair  of  deep  armlets  are  formed  of  six  bars  of  gold,  each  bearing  two 
columns  of  thirty-seven  rowsof  beads,  which  heldapart  as  many  rows  of  minute  beads 


Tlie  Treasure  of  Lahun.  99 

of  carnelian  and  turquoise.  These  armlets  were  each  fastened  on  by  sliding  a  broad 
strip  of  gold  in  grooves,  the  strip  bearing  the  name  and  titles  of  Amenemhat  III 
in  blue  and  white,  on  an  inlaid  flat  ground  of  carnelian.     See  frontispiece. 

(9)  A  similarly  made  pair  of  bracelets  had  eight  bars  with  twenty-three  rows 
of  beads,  but  witliout  an  inlaid  sliding  piece. 

(10)  Two  pairs  of  small  gold  lions  were  found,  which  had  double  threading 
holes  from  end  to  end  of  the  base.  The  distances  of  the  holes  prevents  their 
belonging  to  either  the  bracelets  or  armlets,  or  to  any  of  the  larger  beads.  They 
were  probably  threaded  on  double  strings  of  small  beads,  fastened  with  a  small  gold 
slider  of  the  double  rope-tie  pattern. 

(11)  Two  pairs  of  larger  gold  lions  had  each  a  single  thread  hole  from  end 
to  end.  They  must  have  been  on  single  strings  of  small  beads,  probably  combined 
with  the  following  : — 

(12,  13,  14)  Three  motto  groups  of  gold  inlaid  :  with /«  ab,  "satisfaction  of 
heart " ;  ab  hetep  between  two  neter  signs,  "  the  heart  in  peace  amidst  the  gods  "  ; 
and  onkh  between  two  sa  signs  on  neb,  "  life  amidst  all  protection."  Each  of  these 
has  a  vertical  slider  at  the  back,  with  a  ring  on  each  part,  hence  they  were 
fasteners  for  a  single  string  of  small  beads.  They  were  probably  hung  on  the  arm 
as  amulets,  each  by  a  single  line  of  beads. 

(15)  There  were  also  two  other  amulets,  shen  signs  of  gold  inlaid,  meaning  the 
fulness  of  life  and  possessions.  One  has  a  slider  at  the  back,  the  other  has  a 
different  form  of  slider,  a  cover  slipping  over  a  fixed  tongue. 

By  the  study  of  the  gauges  of  all  the  double  threading,  the  diameters  of  beads, 
the  numbers  of  different  patterns,  the  numbers  of  various  fasteners,  the  known 
length  of  necklaces,  the  usual  patterns  on  statues  and  paintings,  and  such  details, 
it  is  possible  to  re-construct  the  original  arrangement  with  but  few  uncertainties. 
It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  the  materials  of  the  great  Dahshur  finds  were  similarly 
restored  to  something  like  their  original  appearance. 

Other  toilet  objects  were  found  :  a  pair  of  copper  knives,  a  pair  of  copper  razors 
with  gold  handles  ;  three  obsidian  vases  with  gold  mounting  on  brim  and  ba.se,  and 
around  the  lid.  The  main  piece  was  a  large  silver  mirror  with  handle  of  obsidian, 
and  east  gold  head  of  Hat-hor ;  the  handle  is  inlaid  with  bands  of  plaited  gold,  and 
leaves  around  the  base  of  carnelian  and  paste — blue  and  white — in  gold  settings. 
Two  inlaid  gold  scarabs  have  gold  wire  rings  to  them  ;  another  scarab  is  of  lazuli ; 
a  fourth  one,  of  lazuli,  engraved  with  the  cartouche  of  Amenemhat  III  in  a  scroll, 
is  probably  the  most  perfect  known,  for  the  sharpness  and  finish  in  every  part,  and 
the  intense  blue  of  the  stone. 

Of  the  funerary  outfit  there  were  eight  alabaster  vases  with  lids  of  the  usual 
type  ;  and  in  a  limestone  chest  were  the  alabaster  canopic  jars.  These  jars  are  of 
the  finest  style,  with  beautifully  finished  human  heads,  and  sharp  inscriptions, 
recording  the  "  Royal  daughter,  Sat-Hathor-ant." 

The  jewellery  had  been  mostly  placed  in  three  caskets.  One  was  covered 
with  panelled  ivory  veneer,  in  the  recesses  of  which  all  round  were  large  gold  zad 
signs.  A  second  was  of  ivory  veneer,  with  two  beautifully  carved  strips  on  the  lid, 
bearing  the  names  and  titles  of  Amenemhat  III  in  relief.  The  third  box  was  only 
of  wood,  which  had  entirely  perished  like  the  wooden  basis  of  the  others.  It  is 
hoped  that  the  ivory  caskets  may  be  eventually  restored  from  the  thousands  of 
fragments  which  have  been  collected. 

The  extraordinary  conditions  of  the  discovery  seem  quite  inexplicable.  The 
tomb  had  been  attacked ;  the  long  and  heavy  work  of  shifting  the  massive  granite 

G  2 


100  The  Treasure  of  Lahun. 

lid  of  the  sarcophagus,  and  breaking  it  away,  had  been  achieved  ;  yet  all  this  gold 
was  left  in  the  recess  of  the  passage,  untouched.  Had  the  crown  been  dragged  out 
of  the  coflfin,  it  would  have  been  bent  in  some  part ;  but  it  was  quite  uninjured,  and 
placed  as  if  carefully  deposited.  The  whole  treasure  seems  to  have  been  stacked  in 
the  recess  at  the  time  of  the  burial,  and  to  have  gradually  dropped  apart  as  the 
wooden  caskets  decayed  in  course  of  years,  with  repeated  flooding  of  storm  water 
and  mud,  slowly  washed  into  the  pit.  It  cannot  be  that  the  whole  was  deliberately 
buried  in  mud  to  hide  it,  as  then  the  parts  would  have  been  in  exact  position.  On 
the  contrary,  everything  showed  a  long  gradual  decay,  during  which  the  wood  and 
the  threads  were  rotted  by  wet,  the  beads  all  rolled  apart,  the  parts  of  the  armlets 
had  fallen  in  every  direction,  and  all  the  ivory  veneer  had  dropped  off  and  lay  in 
a  confused  stratum  of  fragments.  This  was  all  bedded  over  by  mud  washing  in, 
to  more  than  a  foot  in  thickness.  The  whole  treasure  was  standing  in  an  open 
recess,  within  arm's  reach  of  the  gold-seekers,  while  they  worked  at  breaking  open 
the  granite  sarcophagus. 

Lahun  contains  some  of  the  strangest  puzzles.  An  immense  chip  heap  was 
banked  up  in  a  quarry,  a  very  usual  and  unimportant  matter.  Yet  in  this  heap  is 
an  offering  pit  built  of  fine  stone,  surrounded  by  an  enclosure  wall ;  at  its  side  stood 
four  wooden  boxes  containing  bowls  of  offerings.  Near  it,  in  the  chips,  were  other 
boxes  of  offerings,  each  sealed  by  a  different  official.  Close  by  lay  the  great 
steering  oar  of  the  king's  funeral  barge.  Why  should  officials  present  boxes  of 
offerings,  and  why  should  there  be  an  offering  pit,  in  a  quarry  ?  Does  it  all  hide 
something  ?  Was  Senusert  ever  buried  in  the  pyramid  ?  Was  his  burial  hidden 
elsewhere  ? 

At  the  foot  of  the  pyramid  a  similar  box  was  found  sealed  up,  containing  the 
skeleton  of  an  infant.  Is  this  a  sacrifice?  These,  and  many  other  questions,  we 
must  try  to  settle  in  the  continuation  of  the  work. 

Coloured  plates  of  all  the  jewellery  will  be  given  in  the  annual  publications, 
and  some  in  the  frontispiece  of  the  next  volume  of  this  Journal. 

The  Treasure  of  Lahun  and  the  other  discoveries  of  the  year  will  be  exhibited 
from  the  22nd  of  June  to  the  i8th  of  July,  hours  10  to  5,  at  University  College, 
London.     Admission  to  the  Exhibition  is  free,  without  ticket. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(      lOI      ) 


BRITISH    SCHOOL    OF    ARCHAEOLOGY   IN   EGYPT. 
HARAGEH,  1913-14. 

Some  very  successful  excavations  have  been  carried  on  this  season,  by  the 
second  camp  of  the  British  School,  on  the  southern  half  of  the  Gebel  Abusir,  an 
isolated  strip  of  desert  lying  in  the  broad  cultivation  between  the  entrance  to  the 
Fayum  and  the  Nile.  The  work  was  chiefly  concentrated  on  the  south-west  side, 
near  the  village  of  El-Harageh. 

This  rich  site,  which  for  some  reason  has  been  neglected  by  the  excavators, 
both  English  and  foreign,  who  have  worked  in  the  district,  yielded  a  series  of 
isolated  cemeteries  of  the  following  periods: — Middle  Pre-historic,  Hlrd-IVth, 
Vlth-XIth,  Xnth,  XVHIth,  XlXth  and  XXHIrd  dynasties,  together  with  the 
inevitable  large  quantity  of  Roman  and  Coptic  burials.  In  addition  to  these 
cemeteries,  which  numbered  fourteen,  there  were  several  large  deposits  of  potsherds 
bordering  on  the  cultivation ;  these  had  been  much  disturbed  by  sebbakhyn 
(collectors  of  nitrous  earth),  so  much  so  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  were 
thrown  out  from  some  town  now  under  the  cultivation  area,  or  whether  they  mark 
small  village  sites  of  which  all  other  traces  have  disappeared.  The  numerous 
inscribed  objects  from  these  mounds  mention  only  one  king — Senusert  II,  builder 
of  the  Lahun  Pyramid,  a  few  miles  away ;  and  the  pottery  was  of  the  town  type, 
very  similar  to  that  of  Kahun,  no  later  types  than  the  Xllth  dynasty  being  found. 
The  same  king  is  alone  mentioned  on  the  inscribed  objects  of  the  adjoining  large 
Xllth  dynasty  cemetery. 

Especially  interesting  was  the  presence  of  Hyksos  pottery  like  that  found  at 
Tell  el-Yehudiyeh  (black  ware,  incised  with  white  triangular  pattern  and  dots). 
These  were  found  both  in  the  sherd-heaps  and  in  tombs  which,  from  the  pottery 
and  other  objects,  appear  to  belong  to  the  Xllth  dynasty.  It  thus  bears  out  the 
view  that  for  some  time  before  the  Hyksos  dynasties,  a  considerable  infiltration  of 
Syrians  was  taking  place. 

A  further  feature  of  these  sherd-mounds  was  the  presence  of  the  foreign 
"  Kamares  "  pottery,  which  Prof.  Petrie  demonstrated  twenty-five  years  ago  to  have 
been  imported  in  the  Xllth  dynasty.  This  pottery  belongs  on  the  Cretan  side  to 
the  period  Middle  Minoan  II,  and  thus  serves  as  another  contemporary  link 
between  the  histories  of  Egypt  and  Crete. 

Nearly  all  the  tombs  had  been  robbed  anciently,  though  they  had  almost 
escaped  the  attention  of  modern  plunderers.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  in  a  very 
large  number  of  graves,  the  skull  was  all  that  remained  whole  of  the  body ;  even 
the  long  bones,  which  might  be  expected  to  last  as  long  as  the  cranium,  were 
smashed  to  pieces  or  absent.  We  refrain  from  dogmatising  on  the  matter,  as  there 
is  no  direct  evidence  that  Egyptian  tomb-robbers  respected  at  any  time  or  in  any 
way  the  dead  whom  they  were  plundering ;  further  observation  may  throw  more 
light  on  this  curious  circumstance. 

The  season's  work  has  resulted  in  a  rich  mass  of  objects,  all  of  which  will 
fortunately  be  on  view  at  the  Annual  Exhibition  of  the  School  in  July.  First 
should  be  mentioned  a  valuable  group  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  consisting  of  inlaid 

G  3 


102  Harageh,   19 13- 14. 

<:/(?«<>««<' jewellery  of  the  same  class  as  the  Dahshur  and  Riqqeh  work,  but  in  silver 
instead  of  gold,  as  well  as  twenty-four  perfect  vases  in  alabaster,  serpentine,  and 
limestone,  and  a  fine  stela.  From  another  grave  came  several  gold  fish,  of  the 
kind  now  known  as  shdl^  one  of  them  being  probably  unique  for  exquisite 
workmanship  and  truth  to  nature. 

Another  rare  group  is  an  untouched  "  button-seal "  burial.  The  seal  has  a 
cross  pattern  and  is  accompanied  by  leg  and  hand  amulets  of  carnelian,  some 
remarkable  gold  work,  and  a  large  quantity  of  beads. 

A  number  of  figures  in  wood  and  stone,  mostly  in  perfect  preservation,  and 
of  the  Xlth-XIIth  dynasties,  were  also  obtained.  A  pair  of  wooden  figures  of 
a  man  and  his  wife  (Xlth  dynasty)  are  of  especially  fine  work. 

Of  the  several  steles,  the  large  stone  of  Nebpu  is  of  special  importance,  as, 
apart  from  its  admirable  workmanship,  the  inscription  invokes  an  unusual  god, 
Hez-hotep,  and  the  "  king  of  the  south  and  north,  Klia-klieper-Ra"  in  the  nesut  dy 
hotep  formulae,  and  mentions  local  place-names  and  titles. 

The  collection  of  beads  and  of  alabaster  vases  is  very  large,  and  over 
250  scarabs,  mostly  of  the  Xllth  and  XVIIIth  dynasties,  as  well  as  a  quantity  of 
Middle  Kingdom  inscribed  cylinders,  were  found.  A  couple  of  painted  tombs 
(probably  of  the  Xth  dynasty)  of  a  Har-shef-iiakht  and  his  wife,  several  Xllth 
dynasty  papyri,  several  wooden  coffins,  and  many  pots  and  sherds  written  in  hieratic, 
together  with  the  steles,  form  a  satisfactory  group  of  inscribed  objects. 

Two  very  small  cemeteries  of  the  Middle  Pre-historic  period  have  yielded 
a  large  quantity  of  pottery,  also  some  flaked  flint  knives  of  the  excellence  peculiar 
to  this  early  time. 

Excavations  have  also  been  made  at  Ghor^b  (Gurob),  in  a  cemetery  of  the 
XlXth  and  later  dynasties.  The  work  of  the  camp  has  been  assisted  by 
Mr.  F.  P.  Frost,  who  undertook  all  the  conservation,  storing  and  packing  of  objects, 
Dr.  Walter  Amsden,  who  measured  over  300  skulls,  and  Mr.  Guy  Brunton,  who 
gave  us  great  help  at  the  beginning  of  the  season ;  while  we  are  responsible  for 
the  recording,  planning,  and  general  management  of  the  camp. 

Rex  Engelb.\ch. 
Battiscombe  Gunn. 
Duncan  Willey. 


(     103     ) 


^      EGYPT   EXPLORATION   FUND. 
THE   EXCAVATIONS   AT   ABYDOS. 

The  work  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund  at  Abydos,  carried  on  during  the 
winter,  191 3-14,  by  the  present  writer,  assisted  by  Prof.  Whittemore,  Mr.  Wainwright, 
and  Mr.  Gibson,  has  been  a  continuance  of  what  had  been  done  in  19 12.  Then,  we 
had  started  from  Mrs.  Flinders  Petrie's  excavations  at  the  Osireion,  from  the  door 
discovered  by  her  and  Miss  Murray  in  the  Hail,  at  the  end  of  the  passage  called  on 
the  plan :  "  Entrance  from  the  temple."  (See  Osireion,  Plate  XV.)  This  passage  we 
entirely  cleared ;  it  is  forty-five  feet  long,  and  leads  to  what  we  thought  at  first  to 
be  two  separate  chambers.  In  front  of  its  end,  at  a  short  distance,  was  a  huge 
lintel  fifteen  feet  long ;  we  see  now  that  it  is  the  doorway  to  the  following 
construction  which  we  e.xcavated  completely. 

We  began  in  front  of  the  doorway  and  of  the  thick  wall  which  extends  right 
and  left.  We  traced  the  enclosure  wall,  and  we  pushed  forward  towards  the  temple 
of  Seti.  After  a  work  of  eleven  weeks  the  construction  was  cleared,  the  plan  of 
which  is  here  reproduced,  and  is  as  follows  :  It  is  a  rectangle,  the  inside  of  which  is 
about  a  hundred  feet  long  and  sixty  wide ;  the  enclosure  wall  is  twenty  feet  thick. 
It  consists  of  two  casings,  the  outer  one  is  of  limestone  rather  roughly  worked  ;  the 
inner  one  is  very  fine  masonry  of  a  red  stone,  which  we  thought  at  first  to  be 
quartzite,  but  which  Dr.  Hume  declared  to  be  a  hard  kind  of  sandstone  coming 
probably  from  the  country  near  Assuan.  The  two  long  sides  are  roughly  north 
and  south,  as  the  Arabs  say,  the  entrance  is  in  one  of  the  shorter  sides,  and  the  other 
is  the  end  wall,  which  is  about  twenty  feet  from  the  temple  of  Seti. 

The  inside  of  the  rectangle  is  divided  into  three  naves  of  unequal  size,  the 
middle  one  being  wider  than  the  side  aisles.  The  naves  are  divided  by  two  colonnades, 
each  having  a  row  of  five  huge  granite  monolithic  pillars,  on  which  rests  an 
architrave  six  feet  high,  made  of  blocks  more  than  fifteen  feet  long.  Architrave 
and  enclosure  wall  supported  the  ceiling,  also  made  of  monoliths  six  feet  thick. 

Ceiling,  architraves,  pillars,  in  fact  all  the  inside,  are  of  Assuan  granite.  The 
whole  building,  the  style  of  its  masonry,  the  total  absence  of  any  decoration  reminds 
one  very  strongly  of  the  so-called  temple  of  the  Sphinx,  so  that  I  think  that  this 
construction  goes  back  to  the  Age  of  the  pyramids,  it  may  be  even  older  than  the 
temple  of  the  Sphinx.  Unfortunately,  the  fine  material  has  contributed  to  its 
destruction.  In  one  corner  only,  in  the  northern  aisle,  the  ceiling  has  been 
preserved.  This  corner  gives  an  idea  of  what  must  have  been  the  majesty  of  the 
construction,  with  its  enormous  stones. 

When  we  reached  the  third  layer  of  the  masonry  in  the  enclosure  wall,  we 
discovered  that  all  round  the  construction  there  were  cells  all  alike,  seventeen  in 
number,  si.x  feet  high  and  wide.  They  are  absolutely  bare,  without  any  ornament 
or  inscription.  They  all  had  doors,  with  one  leaf:  the  holes  in  which  they  turned  are 
still  visible.  It  was  to  be  expected  that  these  cells  opened  on  a  floor,  but  in  front 
of  them  there  is  only  a  very  narrow  ledge  which  goes  all  round  the  construction. 
Below  the  ledge  the  fine  masonry  continues,  and  at  a  depth  of  about  fourteen  feet 
the  water  was  reached  at  a  level  which  is  now  that  of  the  infiltration  in  the  cultivated 

(J  4 


104 


Excavations  at  Abydos. 


land.  We  could  not  go  deeper,  owing  to  the  quantity  of  granite  blocks  which  have 
been  thrown  there.  Water  was  found  in  several  places,  and  it  is  clear  now  that  the 
two  side  aisles  and  the  small  sides  of  the  middle  one  were  a  continuous  pool,  on 
both  sides  of  which  was  the  ledge.  On  the  outer  side  of  the  pool  are  the  cells,  on 
the  inner  the  pillars  of  the  colonnades.  The  ledge  is  not  a  slab,  it  is  the  big  stone 
of  the  masonry  which  has  been  hollowed  out,  so  that  the  ledge  projects  over  the 
water.  The  masonry  goes  down  probably  another  twelve  feet  below  the  present 
level  of  the  water. 


Opposite  the  doorway,  the  end  wall  is  covered  with  sculptures,  showing 
Menepthah  worshipping  Osiris  and  other  gods.     There  are  also  large  representations 

of  the  two  usual  amulets,  the  ^  and  the  buckle  X.     This  has  decidedly  a  funerary 

character,  and  seems  to  indicate  a  tomb.  At  the  foot  of  this  end  wall  is  the  ledge 
and  the  door  of  a  cell.  The  back  wall  of  this  cell  has  been  broken  through,  so  as 
to  make  a  door  which  has  been  blocked  afterwards  with  stones.  This  door  gives 
access  to  a  large  chamber,  wider  than  the  whole  construction,  with  a  ceiling  made 
of  stones  leaning  against  each  other.  The  room  was  found  empty.  The  sculptures 
on  the  ceiling  and  on  the  side  walls,  which  are  of  the  time  of  Seti  I,  are  of  a  nature 
indicating  that  it  is  the  so-called  tomb  of  Osiris,  the  entrance  of  which  was 
concealed,  since  it  looked  exactly  like  a  cell.  I  consider  this  chamber  as  being  of 
a  later  date  than  the  pool. 

The  middle  nave  was  a  huge  block  of  masonry  going  down  as  deep  as  the 
other  side  of  the  aisles.  The  level  of  its  floor  is  that  of  the  ledge  and  of  the  cells. 
It  supports  the  pillars  of  the  colonnades,  and  it  has  two  staircases,  one  at  each  end, 
going  down  towards  the  water.  This  platform  is  an  island,  being  surrounded  by 
water  on  its  four  sides.  There  is  no  path  to  reach  it,  even  at  the  doorway,  which 
has  only  the  ledge. 

Thus  the  result  of  last  winter's  campaign  has  been  the  discovery  of  the  great 
pool,  w.hich  undoubtedly  is  Strabo's  well,  and  of  the  tomb  of  Osiris  which  was 
entered  from  the  pool,  and  which  I  consider  as  being  of  later  date. 

Edouard  Naville. 


Excavations  at  Abydos. 


105 


Excavating  the  Great  Hall  of  the  Osireion. 


f^ 


Interior  ok  the  oreai   Hall  01   the  Osireion. 


(     ic6    ) 


HIERATIC   OSTRAKA   FROM   THEBES. 

Among  the  ostraka  at  University  College,  London,  collected  from  Thebes  by- 
Prof.  Petrie,  two  of  the  longer  and  more  complete  examples  are  here  transcribed 
and  translated.  They  are  both  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  written  on  flakes  of  white 
limestone.  The  hymn  to  Mut  has  red  spots  at  intervals  to  separate  the  lines  ;  these 
spots  are  darker  than  the  text  in  the  photograph.  Probably  both  of  these  came 
from  the  clearance  of  the  Ramesseum. 

Transcription, 

Recto. 

No.  I. — 22  X  i6  cm. 


I    "  '    I  Ci      — M 0  I    •  I     \\  III  ^^WA 


2 

I        A/gW\A 
I 


•*  0  I 


II         I 


.^ Q 


Verso. 

10  < 


Translation,    Verso. 


"'  There  was  given  to  her  by  T-o-merut, 

Y  her  daughter  \  sack 

Y  In  toto  li  sack  for  the  woven  cloth 


The  same  ligature  as  for  instance  in  P.  Abbott  5/5. 
Against  the  reading  ^  see  note  in  the  translation. 
The  point  is  evidently  accidental. 


Hieratic  Ostraka  from   Thebes.  10/ 

Translation,  Recto. 

\  Year  2,  3rd  month  of  Harvest  (Epiphi)  day  24  of  King  Set-nekht 

I   (the  day)  when  Hes-su-enbof  dismissed  the  Theban  woman  (?)  Hunura 

•|    I  gave  her  during  three  years  in  every  single  month  \  sack  of  wheat  (durrah), 

I    makes  9  sacks.    She  gave  me  a  woven  cloth  ^  saying :  Give  it  to  the  cloth  shop(?)' ! 

It  was  brought 
\  to  me  as  valuing  \  sack  of  wheat.     I  gave  it  (but)  they  refused  it  saying  :  It  is 

bad. 
I    I  repeated  it  to  her,  saying  :  It  has  been  refused.     She  gave  it  to  me 
\  and  I  sent-  her  a  sack  of  wheat 
\  by  Hoye,  the  son  of  Si-utoyet. 
I   There  was  given  to  her  by  Nub-em-woskhet  \  sack 


A'ecto. 


Verso. 


'  One  cannot  read  the  name  of  a  person  and  translate  "  give  it  to  Merira  ! "  as  in  that  case  the 
preposition  ought  to  be  «  and  not  r. 
^  Correct  'H  <tiu>  n  —  s. 


io8 


Hieratic  Ostraka  from   Thebes. 


Notes. 

Owing  to  lexicographical  difficulties  the  contents  of  this  curious  text  are  by 
no  means  clear.  The  principal  matter  is  a  bargain.  The  weaving  woman  Hunura 
tried  to  sell  a  cloth,  or  what  may  be  the  sense  of  mrw,  by  the  mediation  of 
Hes-su-enbof  who  had  dismissed  her,  if  I  rightly  understand  the  sense  of  the  second 
line,'  after  she  had  been  in  his  service  for  three  years.  This  cloth  having  been 
refused  by  the  draper  on  account  of  its  bad  quality,  Hes-su-enbdf  bought  it  himself, 
giving  for  it  in  all  li  sacks  of  wheat,  i.e.,  6  times  as  much  as  the  woman  had  asked, 
having  paid  only  {  sack.  How  all  this  is  to  be  connected,  is  not  clear  to  me.  At 
any  rate  the  text  is  interesting  in  several  respects  not  the  least  for  its  date,  proving 
that  Set-nekht  has  reigned  at  least  2  years." 


HVMN  TO  MUT. 

Transcription,  Recto. 
No.  2. — i6i  X  I3i  cm. 


A^AAAA        rt^AA/NA 


i: 


AAA/W*   A^/»/\AA 


^^  -www  O    I    -■?)..?)  '      S 


'  It  is  impossible  to  take  Al'  in  the  technical  sense  of  divorce  known  by  demotic  contracts. 
'  Concerning  the  year  lo  +  .r  G.AUTHIER  (A/t/r£  (/t'j  ro/>.  III,  p.   154)  has  rightly  questioned 
the  correctness  of  the  reading  of  WEILL  {Recueil  inscr.  Sinai,  p.  215,  No.  118). 

•  Or   ^^ 


Or 


O 


The  signs  above  the  line  are  the  remnants  of  the  first  text  covering  the  stone. 


I 


Hieratic  Ostraka  from   Thebes. 


109 


Translation. 
Recto} 
\   Hail  to  thee,  eye  of  Re,  Mut — Lady  of  [  .  .  .  , 


1 

■f Mut — beloved   by   the   bark    of  the   morning   Sun — walking   proudly 

[ 

\ ]  heaven  (?) — The    Sun    rises   at    thy   pleasure — [he]   sets    [at   thy 

pleasure 

\ ]  bows  do*n(?) — ,  in  order  to  ask  life  for  them,  the  [ 

\  The  excellent  Eye  of  Uzat, — the  great  image  of  Thebes  (?) — who  satisfies  his 

father  Re, — in  the  name  [  .  .  .  . 
\  father  Atum — in  the  name  of  Schesemtet,  the  goddess  (?) — the  beautiful  sage 

one  before  Re — in  the  name  of  [ 

j  face   of  the   only   one-   towards   the   rising    Sun. — The    wild    cattle    of    the 

mountains  [ 

\  the  worms  kiss  the  ground. — He  illuminates  the  Nether-world  with  his  bright 

eye— [ 

I   .  .  .  Thou  hast  made  the  earth  after  thine  own  heart. — Thou  hast  settled  the 

heaven  in  the  name  of  [ 


Recto. 


'  The  line  —  corresponds  to  the  red  dot  of  the  Egyptian  text  and  denotes  the  end  ot  a  phrase. 
'  "  The   only   one  "  is  a  name  of  the  sun,  appearing  as   the  uraeus  snake.      See   Sethe, 
Untersuchungen,  V,  p.  122. 


I  lO  Hieratic  Ostraka  from   Thebes. 

Verso. 


o     C  ?  • 


Verso. 


'  The   whole   cycle   of  gods  jubilates. — The  meadows  (?)  exult. — The  Hathors 

[rejoice  in The  birth-goddesses  (?)] 

^  jubilate  in  the  birth  house.* — The  Mentuy,  their  voices  (sound)  in  the  heaven. — 

[ The  meadows  (?)] 

*  are  bright  with  dew  ^  in  .  .  .  . — O    thou   who  sees  the  only  one — Heaps  (?) 

[ 

•|    Sun,  who  sees  the  hill* — the  voice  jubilates  and  my  land  is  rejoicing — [ 

?  with   cymbals." — The   southern    nations    praise  her"  face. — The  northern  .  .  . 

[ 

\    Cheerful  is  the  face  of  Hathor — when  the  inundation  comes  in  its  time. — The 

meadows 

i"  corn — The  zizi  plant  sprouts  leaves — .  .  .  [ 

^ — O  thou  who  seest  ...  in  the  face  of  [ 

'"  wTho  beholds  every  day. 

'  This  is  scarcely  (I  9    P==l 

"  A  special  room  in  the  temple  consecrated  to  birth  goddesses,  in  connexion  with  the  divine 
birth  of  the  king.  '  I  suppose  there  is  a  confusion  between  '  I  d  t  "■  net  "  and  "  dew." 

*  Perhaps  a  geographical  name.  »  =  KOTKU  :  KeUKUU  . 

'  This  suffix  may  be  corrected  to  "  thy  "  (2nd  person  fern.). 


Hieratic  Ostraka  from  Thebes. 


Ill 


J  'erso. 


Notes. 


The  Recto  contains  a  hymn  to  the  Theban  goddess  Mut,  called  "eye  of  Re," 
an  epithet  known  also  from  other  texts.'  This  expression,  originally  signifying  the 
Sun,  has  become  very  early  a  special  goddess,-  which  has  been  identified  at  several 
places  with  their  principal  goddesses.  Our  text  shows  that  in  Thebes  the  eye  of 
Re  was  Mut,  whilst  generally  it  was  Hathor.  I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  the  text 
of  the  Verso,  evidently  being  a  part  of  a  religious  hymn,  is  a  continuation  of  the 
hymn  to  Mut. 

W.  Spiegelberg. 


'  A.Z.,   1895,  Tafel   IV,  Cairo  Catal.,  440 ff.,  78  (Miroirs).     PlERRET  :  Calal.  Louvre,  I,  9. 
Junker  :  Auszug  der  Hathor,  p.  -54. 

See  Sethe  :   Unterstichungen,  V,  pp.  123  ff. 


(      112      ) 


TWO  SILVERSMITH'S  MODELS  FROM  EGYPT. 

Two  small  terracotta  objects  (Figs,  i,  2,  4)  were  bought  by  me  some  years  ago  at 
Casira's  shop  in  Cairo.  They  were  said  to  come  from  the  same  place  as  the  silver 
and  gold  vases  of  Tell  Basta,  now  in  the  Cairo  Museum.  The  dealer  believed 
them  to  have  been  found  together,  and  he  showed  me  some  more  pieces  of  the 
same  hard  yellowish  clay  as  the  figures  which  I  purchased.  I  believe  a  full 
examination  will  show  that  his  opinion  was  correct. 

F'g-  I  (S.391  •"  my  Collection).  Figure  of  a  goat,'  80  mm.  high.  One  horn  is 
missing,  and  all  four  feet.  The  head,  and  the  back  with  the  tail,  are  of  excellent 
spirited  work  ;  the  side  of  the  legs,  especially  on  one  side,  is  well  treated,  while 
the  front  of  the  figure  is  quite  neglected.  By  far  the  best  part  is  the  head,  where 
even  the  nostrils  are  indicated,  and  the  eyes  accurately  modelled.  But  the  style  is 
in  no  way  what  we  should  expect  for  a  clay  figure  ;  it  is  of  the  style  of  metal  work, 
every  detail  being  engraved,  and  it  strongly  resembles  the  figure  of  the  goat 
forming  the  handle  of  the  silver  jug  from  Tell  Basta. 


LHf^l 


■<)< 


Figs.   I,  2. 


Fig.  3- 


When  once  the  comparison  between  the  two  figures  has  been  made,  the 
attitude  and  the  conditions  of  the  clay  goat  are  explained  ;  it  was  the  model 
for  casting  a  figure  intended  to  stand  in  the  same  way  as  a  handle  on  a  jug,  and 
thus  there  was  no  need  for  elaboration  on  the  front  of  it.  The  feet  now  missing 
were  attached  to  the  jug.     As  this  terracotta  is  a  model  for  a  figure  in  some  more 

'  That  this  is  intended  for  a  goat  is  probable,  although  the  horns  are  turned  the  wrong  way  ; 
a  gazelle  is  hardly  likely,  and  still  less  any  other  animal.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  for  supposing 
a  fantastic  animal  to  be  intended,  although  the  shape  of  the  legs  might  at  first  suggest  such  an 
explanation.  It  is  well  known  how  many  irregularities  the  horns  of  goats  show,  even  in  European 
countries. 


Two  Silversmith's  Models  from  Egypt. 


113 


costly  material,  it  belongs  to  the  same  age  as  the  silver  vase  of  Tell  Basta,  and  very 
probably  is  from  the  same  workshop.  Handles  in  the  form  of  animals  are  well 
known  in  Egyptian  pictures  of  the  New  Kingdom  ;  for  examples  see  Champollion, 
Monuments.  PI.  131,  and  VV.  M.  MiJLLER,  Asien,  348  =  W.  M.  MiJLLER,  Egypto- 
logical Researches,  II,  Taf  2  and  6,  from  the  tribute  of  Asiatic  people;  compare 
also  the  metal  vtfee  of  the  time  of  Thothmes  III,  SCHAEFER,  Altaegyptische 
Prunkge/dsse,  p.  44,  and  Wainwright,  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Atithropologv, 
VI,  Pis.  IX,  X,  XI,  amongst  the  tribute  of  the  Keftiu  as  well  as  of  the  ordinary 
Asiatics. 

If  the  origin  of  this  kind  of  ornament  may  point  to  Syria  and  the  Aegean 
world,  it  was  quite  adopted  by  the  Egyptians  themselves,  as  the  jug  from  Tell 
Basta  shows.  It  is  perhaps  a  new  argument  for  the  purely  Egyptian  character  of 
the  silver  find  from  Tell  Basta  that  we  are  able  to  lay  our  hands  on  the  clay 
models  which  the  silversmiths  used. 


:i^ 


32^ 


Figs.  4,  s,  6,  7. 


Y\z.  8. 


Fig.  4  is  perhaps  as  interesting.  It  is  a  round  rod  of  about  7  mm.  in  diameter, 
and  30  mm.  long.  There  is  no  sign  of  a  break  at  the  undecorated  end.  The  other 
end  shows  the  head  of  a  calf,  of  very  beautiful  work.  All  the  details  around  the 
eyes  and  the  mouth  are  wrought  with  the  utmost  care,  and  the  modelling  reminds 
us  of  metal  work,  as  in  the  previous  figure.  We  have  evidently  another  model 
before  us,  and  as  the  material  corresponds  exactly  with  the  clay  of  which  the  goat 
is  made,  there  is  a  strong  confirmation  of  this  explanation.  No  such  material  is 
otherwise  known,  down  to  Hellenistic  times.  The  fragments  of  another  goat,  and 
of  some  undetermined  object,  which  I  saw  at  the  same  dealers,  were  of  exactly  the 
same  hard  clay,  evidently  specially  prepared  for  such  models  for  a  silversmith. 
This  clay  was  in  Hellenistic  and  Roman  times  used  for  a  special  kind  of  small 
vases,  decorated  with  reliefs,  and  generally  gilt ;  they  are  copies  of  gold  vases  of 
that  age.  (Compare  on  these  va.ses,  Schreiber-Pagenstecher,  Ausgrabungen 
in  Alexandria,  die  griech-aegypt.  Thongefdsse,  p.  70  et  seq.) 

What  was  the  purpose  of  the  object  for  which  our  terracotta  served  as 
a  model  ?  The  first  idea  that  suggests  itself  is  that  of  a  rhyton.  Such  rhyta  are 
known  down  from  Mykenaean  times  in  Greek  art  {Kast,  Arch.  Jahrb.,  1911,249), 
and  DE  Mot  {Revue  Arctieologique,  1904,  II,  201  et  seq.)  has  collected  a  certain 
number  of  parallels  among  the  Egyptian  drawings  of  vases  brought  by  foreign 
ambassadors  to  Egypt  (compare  Wainwright,  I.e.). 

But  all  of  these  vases,  just  like  the  Minoan  rhyta,  always  show  a  very  short 
neck  ;   they  are  in  reality  only  heads  of  animals.     On  the  contrary,  among  the 

H 


114  Two  Silversmith's  Models  from  Egypt. 

precious  vase  forms  collected  by  Prisse  d'Avennes  from  the  monuments  of 
Rameses  III  {Collection  des  vases  du  regne  de  Ramsh  III,  Karnac  et  Medinet 
Habou,  compare  DiJMICHEN,  Photographische  Resultate,  Atlas,  PI.  2  f),  rods 
perfectly  similar  to  our  terracotta  are  figured  (see  Figs.  5,  6,  7) ;  they  end  in  the 
head  of  a  gryphon,  a  lion,  and  a  dog,  .so  a  calf  would  be  of  the  same  class.  They 
cannot  according  to  these  .shapes  have  been  used  for  drinking  purposes  ;  if  the 
long  rod  were  hollow  it  would  be  most  inconvenient  to  drink  from,  and  the  object 
would  need  to  be  very  large. 

Now  in  the  Cairo  Museum  there  is  a  similar  object  made  of  wood  (Fig.  8, 
21  cm.  long).  It  is  a  cylinder  ending  in  a  ram's  head,  and  very  elaborately  worked 
and  ornamented.  There  is  no  hole  in  the  head,  so  it  cannot  be  a  rhyton.  The 
inner  diameter  of  the  cylinder  is  somewhat  under  8  cm.  The  only  explanation 
I  can  think  of  which  would  agree  to  the  wooden  object  in  Cairo,  as  well  as  the 
precious  metal  objects  of  Rameses  III,  would  be  a  handle  for  a  cup,  or  dish,  or 
other  such  object.  The  clay  model  in  my  possession  would,  of  course,  have  to  be 
enlarged  for  such  a  use.  But  this  is  no  objection,  as  the  same  thing  is  true  for 
most  ancient  Egyptian  models,  and  may  be  true  even  for  the  goat. 

The  terracotta  model  from  its  style  and  its  history  belongs  to  Ramesside 
times,  like  the  pictures  given  by  Prisse.  The  wooden  cylinder  in  Cairo  is  said  to 
have  come  from  Thebes,  and  certainly  belongs  to  the  New  Kingdom.  As 
a  curious  fact  connecting  this  wooden  handle  with  the  terracotta  model,  I  may 
mention  that  the  ornament  round  the  edge  of  the  cylinder  occurs  again  just  where 
the  neck  begins  at  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  model,  possibly  as  an  indication 
of  hair. 

The  form  of  the  handle,  it  seems,  survived  down  to  Hellenistic  times.  Among 
the  bronzes  found  in  Egypt  similar  handles  ending  in  rams'  heads,  or  the  heads  of 
gryphons  and  eagles,  are  not  unfrequent  {e.g.,  Edg.\R,  Greek  Bronzes,  Cairo, 
Pis.  VI,  27872,  VIII,  27746-7,  XIX,  27869;  also  Arch.  Auz.,  1903,  148^,  p.  145). 
I  am  well  aware,  of  course,  that  they  are  also  found  outside  of  Egypt,  e.g.,  at 
Boscoreale.  Still  there  seems  to  be  at  least  a  very  strong  predilection  among  the 
Egyptians  for  this  kind  of  handle,  as  it  occurs  often  in  terracotta  of  Graeco-Roman 
times  (Pagenstecher,  Griech-aegypt.  Thongefdsse,  PI.  XXXIX,  5). 

Perhaps  this  predilection  has  historical  reasons.  The  type,  as  we  see,  was 
familiar  to  the  Egyptians  since  the  New  Kingdom,  and  possibly  even  earlier ;  at 
Kahun,  with  objects  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  Petrie  found  a  spoon  with  a  duck's  head 
at  the  end  of  the  handle  {Kahun,  VIII,  17,  p.  29);  and  in  prehistoric  times  we 
find  animals  of  all  kinds  surmounting  pins,  combs,  etc.,  or  walking  along  the 
handle  of  a  spoon.  A  well-known  shape  of  a  handle  for  some  instrument  ends  in 
a  hippopotamus  figure  or  a  human  head  (Petrie,  Naqada,  Pis.  LXI-LXIV  ; 
Cap.\RT,  Primitive  Art,  Figs.  46,  156).  Probably  some  religious  meaning  was 
originally  attached  to  such  ornament ;  but  by  the  time  the  handles  of  the  New- 
Kingdom  were  in  use,  such  meaning,  if  ever  it  existed,  had  long  become  obsolete, 
and  the  animal  head  at  the  end  of  these  handles  had  turned  into  a  simple,  but  very 
appropriate,  form  of  ornament. 

It  is  not  my  intention,  of  course,  to  follow  out  in  this  short  article  all  the 
history  of  handles  ornamented  with  figures  of  animals  or  human  beings.  All 
I  intend  is  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  two  objects  here  published  for  the  first 
time,  and  to  show  how  this  type  of  handle  probably  survived  into  Hellenistic  times, 
and  possibly  may  be  derived  from  prehistoric  Egyptian  types. 

Fr.  W.  V.  BiSSING. 


115 


EGYPT    IN   AFRICA. 


I. 


Nature  of  the  evidence. 
Treatment  of  the  body. 

1.  Mummifying. 

2.  Contracted  burial. 

3.  Beheading  the  dead. 

4.  Passage  for  the  spirit. 

5.  Vehicle  for  the  spirit. 

6.  Restoration  of  ability  to  the  corpse. 

7.  Recess  graves. 

8.  Pole  over  grave. 

9.  Round-domed  graves. 

10.  Domed  pit  tomb. 

11.  Sloping  passage  tomb. 


Offerings  for  the  dead. 

12.  Beer  and  flour  offerings. 

13.  Cloth  offering. 

14.  Offerings  at  the  grave. 

1 5.  Killing  the  offerings. 

16.  Offering  chamber  above  grave, 

17.  Drain  to  the  east. 

18.  Men  sacrificed  at  royal  funeral. 

19.  Eldest  son  the  family  priest. 

20.  The  funeral  image. 

21.  Tall  hats  of  officiants. 

22.  Offering  chamber  for  the  image. 

23.  The  soul  house. 


Though  as  a  matter  of  mere  geography  the  continental  position  of  Egypt  has 
always  been  obvious,  yet  as  a  matter  of  humanity  it  has  always  appeared  to  be 
aloof  from  the  rest  of  the  continent,  in  a  way  that  perhaps  no  other  country  is 
detached  from  its  natural  connection.  Egypt  has  always  stood  at  a  far  higher  level 
of  civilisation  than  any  other  part  of  Africa,  for  the  links  with  Syria,  Crete,  or 
Greece  have  been  leading  factors.  So  far  have  these  connections  prevailed  that  we 
need  now  to  recall  with  care  how  largely  the  earliest  stratum  of  Egyptian  ideas  has 
been  at  one  with  the  rest  of  Africa.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  here  quote  from 
half-a-dozen  different  works,  of  original  observers  in  the  regions  south  of  the 
Mediterranean,  most  of  whom  have  written  without  any  idea  of  the  parallels  which 
exist  between  their  record  and  that  of  Egypt, 

It  may  aid  in  considering  the  evidence  of  these  various  parallels,  if  we  first 
clearly  separate  the  different  conclusions  which  might  be  drawn  from  them,  and  see 
to  what  end  they  point.  Similarities  between  ancient  Egypt  and  modern  Africa 
may  have  resulted  in  three  different  ways.  They  may  be:  (i)  due  to  a  parallel 
development  of  thought  without  any  material  connection  ;  such  seems  to  have  been 
the  case  in  the  ancestor  worship  and  off"erings  of  the  Chinese  and  of  the  Egyptians 
respectively.  Or  (2)  they  may  be  due  to  direct  descent,  in  Egypt  and  in  Africa, 
from  a  common  source.  Or  (3)  may  be  the  result  of  Africa  borrowing  from  Egypt. 
In  judging  between  these  different  causes,  the  main  tests  are  that  the  independent 
and  parallel  development  (i),  may  be  disproved  by  such  small  details  appearing  as 
are  unlikely  to  be  devised  independently.  On  the  other  hand,  the  historical 
conditions  of  Egypt  are  such,  that  the  absence  of  much  communication  with  Africa 
before  the  conquests  of  the  Xllth  and  XVIIIth  dynasties  precludes  (3),  by  the 
direct  borrowing  of  details  which  only  belong  to  the  Old  Kingdom  and  earlier,  and 
which  disappeared  before  the  Nubian  conquests  of  Egypt  began. 

li  2 


Ii6  Egypt  in  Africa. 

Thus  the  nature  of  the  evidence  may  leave  only  (2), — a  direct  descent  from 
a  common  source, — as  the  possible  explanation :  but  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
such  evidence  by  exclusion  should  apply  to  even  a  majority  of  the  cases  which  were 
due  to  common  descent.  On  looking  to  the  number  of  similarities  to  be  dealt  with 
— about  sixty  in  all — we  may  set  aside  four  or  five  as  clearly  due  to  late  Egyptian 
influence  of  the  Graeco- Roman  period,  and  ten  as  being  instances  of  beliefs  which 
were  general,  and  do  not  yield  evidence  either  wa)%  Of  the  forty-five  resemblances 
in  customs  or  products  there  are  thirteen  which  arc  only  explicable  by  (2),  descent 
from  a  common  source.  Now,  as  we  have  pointed  out,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  in  the 
nature  of  the  evidence  that  we  should  generally  be  able  to  exclude  parallel  develop- 
ment, by  using  the  test  of  early  extinction  of  the  resemblance  in  Egypt ;  as  large 
a  proportion  as  thirteen  in  forty-five  is  enough  to  show  that  direct  descent  is  in 
general  more  likely  than  parallel  development.  Accordingly  we  shall  be  justified 
here,  by  the  proportions  of  the  evidence,  in  regarding  only  direct  descent  from 
a  common  source — which  is  so  abundantly  evident  ;  such  common  source  being  in 
nearly  all  cases  a  primitive  stock  of  population,  and  only  rarely  a  later  influence 
which  passed  through  Egypt  on  its  way  into  Africa. 

Apart  from  the  question  of  which  mode  of  connection  has  produced  these 
parallels,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  parallels  are  mainly  of  value  to  us  as 
giving  a  living  view  of  material  which  we  only  see  dead  in  Egypt.  We  cannot  ask 
an  ancient  Egyptian  why  he  performs  a  ceremony  ;  we  can  but  very  imperfectly 
imagine  what  were  the  ceremonies  performed,  by  looking  at  the  implements  used, 
or  at  some  chance  representation  of  one  particular  stage.  The  modern  African  can 
be  cross-examined,  and  every  step  of  his  actions  recorded.  Whether  there  be 
a  direct  copying  of  Egypt,  a  common  descent,  or  even  a  parallel  development,  such 
living  view  of  the  case  before  us  must  be  an  invaluable  guide  to  understanding  the 
proceedings  and  ideas  of  the  ancient  ceremonies  and  beliefs  which  were  similar  to 
those  of  modern  times. 

The  writers  quoted  here  are :  ( W)  The  Native  Races  of  British  Central  Africa, 
by  A.  Werner,  1906  ;  (L)  The  Lower  Niger  and  its  Tribes,  by  Major  Leonard, 
1906;  (F;  The  Voice  of  Africa,  by  Leo  Frobenius,  1913  ;  (S),  The  Cult  of  the 
Nyakang,  by  Dr.  Seligmann,  191  i  ;  (D)  Article  Dinka,  in  "  Encyc.  Relig.  and 
Ethics";  and  (H)  Hamitic  Problem  in  the  Anglo-Egyptian  Sudan  {/our.  R.  Anthrop. 
Soc),  191 3,  both  by  Dr.  Seligmann  ;  (J)  Racial  and  Tribal  Migrations  in  Africa, 
by  Sir  H.  H.  JOHNSTON  (Jour.  R.  Geog.  Soc),  1913  ;  (N)  At  the  back  of  the  Black 
Man's  Mind,  by  R.  E.  Dennett,  1906. 

The  material  may  best  be  classified  under  the  following  heads  : — 

Treatment  of  the  body  and  burial ;  Offerings  for  the  dead  ;  and,  in  our  next 
number.  Royal  functions  ;  Beliefs  ;  Material  products ;  Late  influence  from  Egypt. 

Treatment  of  the  body. 

I.  Mummifying. — This  appears  to  be  restricted  now  to  important  people,  but 
the  caremony  is  evidently  thought  desirable  where  it  can  be  performed  ;  as  the 
damp  and  heat  of  the  tropics  make  it  especially  difficult  to  preserve  flesh  from 
decomposition,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  so  difficult  a  process  should  only  be  resorted 
to  in  special  instances. 

"  The  Babenda  seem  to  make  some  attempt  at  mummifying  the  corpses  of 
their  chiefs,  by  rubbing  the  body  all  over  with  boiled  maize,  repeating  the  process 
till  the  whole  skin  becomes  dry  and  shrivelled."     (W.,  163.) 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


117 


"The  elaborate  manner  of  embalming,  as  it  was  practised  by  the  ancient 
Egyptians,  is  not,  of  course,  known  ;  but  in  the  case  of  kings  and  chiefs,  ...  a  rude 
method  of  embalming  is  carried  out.  Having  first  smeared  the  body  with  a 
decoction  from  certain  plants  ...  it  is  rubbed  all  over  with  camwood,  and  .  . 
a  quantity  of  spirit  .  .  is  poured  over  it  .  .  .  The  favourite  method,  however,  .  .  . 
is  to  smoke-dry  the  corpse."     (L.,  175-6.) 

2.  Contracted  burial. — This  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Africa,  as  it  is  well- 
known  in  pre-historic  Europe ;  but  it  is  still  very  usual  from  east  to  west  of  Africa. 
"  The  Yaos  lay  their  dead  with  the  faces  to  the  east,  and  with  the  knees  bent  up  to 
the  chin."     (W.,  175:) 

In  Nigeria,  "  the  corpse  is  reduced  to 
the  smallest  possible  compass  by  drawing 
its  knees  upwards  and  tying  the  arms  to  its 
sides,  bound  up  in  rolls  of  cloth  and  .  .  . 
so  placed  as  to  bring  the  face  of  the  dead 
looking  westwards."     (F.,  21.) 

"  The  Galla  of  British  East  Africa  bury 
in  a  contracted  position,  the  corpse  being 
tied  in  this  posture,  but  inhumation  is  in 
the  squatting,  not  the  lying  posture ;  .  .  . 
among  the  Nilotes  ...  I  believe  by  the 
Shilluk,  and  certainly  by  ihe  Shish  Dinka 
.  .  the  body  is  laid  .  .  on  its  right  side 
with  the  knees  and  arms  flexed,  the  head 
resting  upon  the  right  hand  .  .  .  Among 
the  Akikuyu  .  .  .  burial,  when  it  does  occur, 
is  on  the  side  in  a  fle.xcd  position  .  .  .  The 
body  is  placed  on  its  side,  with  the  knees 
bent  and  drawn  up.  The  head  rests,  if  a 
man,  on  the  palm  of  the  right  hand  ;  if  a 
woman,  on  the  palm  of  the  left,  or  it  may 
be  placed  on  the  two  hands  placed  together, 
palms  facing  .  .  .  The  inhabitants  of  the 
lacustrine  kingdoms  of  Ankole  and  Unyoro 
also  bury  in  the  flexed  position  ;  the  Bahima 
commit  their  rulers  to  the  village  manure 
heap,  commoners  are  buried  at  the  door  of 
their  huts,  but  in  both  classes  the  arms  and 
legs  are  doubled  up  against  the  body,  which 
lies  on  its  side,  and  the  head  is  bent  forward. 
The  Banyoro  place  the  body  on  its  left 
side,   with    legs  and  arms  flexed,  and  the  hands  under  the  head."     (H.,  83-4.) 

The  regular  attitude  of  the  pre-historic  Egyptians  was  moderately  flexed,  with 
the  head  to  the  south  and  face  west.  In  the  close  of  the  pre-historic  Age  the  body 
was  often  tightly  bandaged  together  forcing  the  legs  and  arms  parallel  to  the  spine, 
and  the  head  bent  forward,  so  as  to  make  an  oval  bundle.  Both  of  these  types  we 
see  to  continue  in  Africa. 

3.  Beheading  the  dead. — "  Never  have  I  come  across  a  people  who  so  truly  held 
in  honour  their  begetters.  And  yet  they  are  the  most  terrible  barbarians  with 
regard  to  the  remains  which  we  see  in  the  bodies  of  our  beloved  ones.     For  it  is  in 

II  3 


Tightly   Contracted  Burial, 
Age  of  Me.na.     Tarkhan. 


Ii8  lig}'pt  in  Africa. 

our  view  horrible  and  repulsive  to  observe  that  they  are  able  to  cut  off  the  heads  of 
their  dead  parents  or  tear  them  from  the  corpses.  It  is  so  brutal  and  so  cruel,  that 
the  mere  thought  of  it  revolts  us.  And  yet  religious  feeling  prompts  these  people 
to  such  an  act  as  this.  For  they  need  these  skulls.  They  need  them,  they  cannot 
dispense  with  their  possession  ;  they  are  their  most  cherished  family  treasure.  The 
poor  defunct  cannot  return,  but  is  for  ever  separated  from  his  family  which  can 
never  be  increased  and  multiplied  unless  the  skull  be  set  up  in  the  home  itself,  or  in 
the  family  receptacle  for  funereal  urns,  and  there  receive  its  offering  at  the  proper 
seasons.  This  is  why  they  must  needs  obtain  them,  even  if  they  can  only  do  so  by 
the  perpetration  of  a  barbarous  custom.  Then  they  enshrine  it  in  their  homes  and 
before  they  themselves  enjoy  a  morsel,  they  pray  the  deceased  member  to  come 
back  into  the  bosom  of  the  family,  and  sacrifice  a  portion  of  every  grain  of  corn  and 
a  drop  of  every  liquid  draught  to  it.  Then,  too,  when  a  girl  of  the  clan  gives  her 
hand  in  marriage  to  a  young  man,  either  her  father  or  her  mother  takes  the  newly 
wedded  to  the  skull ;  they  offer  it  some  food  and  drink,  and  fervently  pray  the  dead 
to  come  back  now  and  give  his  own  family  his  power  again.  And  the  youthful 
wife  takes  of  the  grain  which  was  laid  in  offering  on  the  skull  and  consumes  it. 
When,  then,  a  child  is  granted  to  the  young  people,  they  hail  it  as  their  forebear 
come  again  to  life."     (F.,  674.) 

Among  the  pre-historic  graves  of  Nagadeh,  many  instances  were  noted  where 
the  skull  had  been  removed  from  the  body,  and  replaced  in  the  grave  after  some 
interval.  That  it  had  not  merely  been  torn  out  by  a  plunderer  was  evident,  as  it 
sometimes  contained  a  string  of  beads,  in  other  cases  it  was  set  upright  on  a  pile  of 
stones,  or  set  upright  on  a  neat  stack  of  all  the  long  bones  and  ribs  arranged  in 
a  heap.  With  such  proofs  of  careful  treatment,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  credit  many 
other  instances  of  removal  of  the  head  as  being  due  to  the  reverence  of  the  relatives. 

4.  Passage  for  the  spirit. — When  burying  those  who  died  of  smallpox,  "  A  small 
reed  is  stuck  into  the  side  of  the  grave.  Along  this  reed  the  disease  will  creep,  and 
so  escape  from  the  body  into  the  open  air."  (W.,  289.)  Similarly  reeds  were  found 
placed  in  the  corners  of  two  perfect  burials  of  the  1st  dynasty  at  Tarkhan.  This, 
in  Egypt,  was  probably  to  allow  a  passage  for  the  spirit ;  at  Deshasheh,  a  small 
hole  was  cut  in  the  rock  from  the  tomb  shaft  to  the  place  of  offerings  ;  and  at 
Saqqarch,  Mr.  Ouibell  has  found  long  flues  constructed  from  the  tomb  out  to  the 
deposits  of  offerings  on  the  upper  level. 

5.  Vehicle  for  the  spirit. — "  At  old  Kapeni's  funeral,  one  of  his  men  went  into 
the  grave  after  the  body  was  laid  in  its  place,  and  shot  an  arrow  up  into  the  air." 
(W.,  175.)  Similarly,  in  the  Early  Kingdom,  the  king's  soul  was  believed  to  fly  up 
to  heaven  on  an  ostrich  plume,  the  shed-shed,  which  was  doubtless  let  fly  from  the 
tomb,  to  be  carried  away  in  the  wind. 

6.  Restoration  of  ability  to  tlie  corpse. — "After  the  grave  was  dug  (among  the 
Atonga)  and  the  body  lowered  into  it,  the  chief  undertaker,  called  '  the  hyaena,' 
because  he  is  not  afraid  to  approach  the  dead,  descended  into  the  grave,  and  untied 
the  fastening  round  the  dead,  exposing  the  face  for  a  few  minutes  ;  whatever  had 
been  brought  to  be  buried  along  with  the  dead  was  arranged  about  the  corpse 
according  to  custom,  and  finally  arranging  the  grave  clothes  and  re-covering  the 
face  'the  hyaena'  climbed  out  again.  Prayers  to  the  dead,  conducted  by  'the 
hyaena,'  with  responses  from  the  other  mourners,  completed  the  obsequies." 
(W.,  162.) 

This  is  closely  parallel  to  the  service  of  the  Egyptian  kher  heb,  the  chief  reciter 
who  undertook  the  ceremony.     He  "  opened  the  mouth  "  of  the  dead  that  the  corpse 


Egypt  in  Africa.  X19 

might  be  able  to  revive,  and  he  recited  all  the  formulae  for  its  preservation  and 
enjoyment  of  the  functions  of  life.  He  specially  consigned  the  dead  to  the  care  of 
the  Jackal-god,  Anubis,  analogous  to  the  helper  of  the  dead  being  termed  "  the 
hyaena." 

7.  Recess  graves. — "  If  a  man  is  buried  in  his  own  house  .  .  a  hole  is  first  dug 
in  the  floor,  then  a  niche  is  made  in  the  side  of  the  hole."  (W.,  165.)  "  The  Yaos 
lay  their  dead  with  their  faces  to  the  east,  and  with  the  knees  bent  to  the  chin. 
This  is  the  invariable  rule,  and  so  the  niche  which  they  make  in  the  side  of  the 
grave  to  receive  the  corpse,  is  dug  out  on  the  west  side  of  the  pit."     (W.,  175.) 

Recess  graves  only  begin  to  appear  in  the  later  part  of  the  pre-historic  age  in 
Egypt,  and  open  pit  graves  continued  in  use  at  the  same  time  and  in  all  later 
periods  more  or  less.  The  recess  was  at  first  but  slight,  and  fenced  across  with 
a  row  of  large  jars,  on  the  west  side  of  the  pit ;  it  became  deeper  in  the  1st  dynasty, 
and  from  the  Ilird  dynasty  onward  it  was  a  distinct  chamber  walled  off  from  the 
shaft.     {Tarkkan  I,  xxv.) 

8.  Pole  over  grave. — "  When  the  grave  is  deep  enough,  stakes  are  driven  in  all 
round  the  sides,  and  two  forked  poles  planted  in  the  bottom,  to  receive  the  ends  of 
the  carrying  pole  (from  which  the  body  is  slung)  when  the  body  is  lowered  into  the 
grave,  so  that  it  is  suspended  without  touching  the  ground.  The  space  is  covered 
in  with  cross-bars  on  the  top  before  filling  in  the  earth.  These  precautions  are 
intended  to  prevent  witches  from  getting  at  the  dead."     (W.,  1 59.) 

At  Tarkhan,  where  the  roofing  of  the  graves  was  often  preserved,  the  regular 
feature  was  a  long  massive  pole  across  the  oblong  grave  from  end  to  end.  It  seemed 
strange  that  the  roofing  logs  and  sticks  of  a  narrow  grave  should  be  supported  by 
a  large  and  valuable  beam  of  wood,  placed  in  the  most  wasteful  position.  It  seems, 
by  analogy,  to  have  been  the  carrying  pole  for  the  coffin  ;  like  the  offering  vases,  it 
could  not  be  resumed  by  the  living,  but  must  be  left  as  consecrated,  and  was  placed 
from  end  to  end  of  the  grave  to  aid  in  the  roofing  of  cross-bars.    {Tarkhan  I,  xxiii.) 

9.  Round-domed  graves. — In  a  cemetery  near  Blantyre,  the  graves  "  were  not 
like  ours,  but  nearly  as  broad  as  long,  and  looked  more  like  rough  garden-beds  than 
anything  else."  Similarly,  at  Tarkhan,  the  complete  tops  of  common  graves  were 
low-domed  heaps,  covered  with  a  crust  of  gypsum  and  sand,  or  else  by  a  low  dome 
of  brick  and  mud,  circular,  or  nearly  so.     {Tarkhan  I,  xxiii.) 

10.  Domed  pit  tomb. — This  is  described  as  "a  great  conical,  or  dome-shaped 
structure  of  mud,  on  the  top  of  which  there  was  a  vessel,  which  gave  out  a  curiously 
hollow  sound  when  I  tapped  on  it.  My  companion  pointed  out  a  small  aperture, 
not  quite  four  feet  high  in  the  dome,  which  led  into  it  on  the  western  side.  I  held 
a  candle  into  it,  and  saw  that  this  conical  dome  had  been  built  over  a  deep  shaft .  .  . 
I  reached  the  bottom  at  about  thirteen  or  fourteen  feet  down,  and  discovered  that 
other  galleries,  some  five-and-a-half  yards  in  length,  and  broader  and  higher  towards 
their  ends,  had  been  driven  towards  the  four  quarters  of  the  compass.  The  entire 
site,  imposing  enough  of  its  kind,  had  been  hewn  out  of  the  hard,  tenacious  fire- 
clay .... 

"  Graves  of  quite  similar  construction  were  formerly  common  in  Nupe-land.  In 
earlier  times  there  were  in  that  country  huge  burial  caves.  These  have  decayed, 
but  old  people  alive  to-day  saw  them  and  entered  them  when  they  were  young. 
There  are  said  to  be  still  a  few  in  the  region  of  Kaba-Bunu,  into  which  one  can 
descend.  I  had  heard  of  them  in  Ibadan,  and  often  received  reports  on  them  after- 
wards. In  Mokwa,  too,  they  also  knew  of  several  of  these  burial  caves.  There 
was  one  of  them  on  the  site  of  the  former  ruler's  palace,  where  the  school  building 

H  4 


I20 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


now  stands.  The  hallowed  spot  is  a  few  hundred  yards  to  its  rear.  Sixty  or 
seventy  years  ago  the  vault  itself  caved  in.  It  was  a  subterranean  cave.  A  circular 
hole  gave  access  to  it,  and  from  this  entrance  lateral  galleries,  of  about  a  man's 
height,  and  which  were  described  as  from  nine  to  twelve  feet  in  breadth,  branched 
off  in  two  directions."     (F.,  19-20.) 


Grave  of  a  Mossi-naba  near  Jako. 
From   Frobenius,    Voice  of  Africa,  Plate  I. 

This  type  of  grave  explains  one  of  the  most  unusual  of  the  Egyptian  sepulchres, 
that  of  the  mastaba  of  Zeser  at  Saqqareh  (the  Step-pyramid).  There  the  main 
feature  is  an  immense  vertical  circular  shaft,  covered  over  by  the  mastaba  above, 
and  branching  into  galleries  below. 

1 1.  The  sloping  passage  tomb. — This  form  is  similar  to  the  pyramid  type,  a  long 
sloping  passage  leading  down  to  the  chamber,  another  passage  of  construction  being 
blocked  up  on  finishing  the  work.     The  antiquity  of  the  idea  of  two  sloping  passages 


Section  of  so-called  Trial  Passages  near  Great  Pyramid,  Gizeh. 
.* 

meeting  is  however  shown  by  the  "  trial  passages  "  near  the  Pyramid  of  Khufu  ; 

these  differ  from  the  passages  in  the  Great  Pyramid  by  having  a  vertical  shaft  at 

the  junction,  like  the  vertical  tube  put  over  the  chamber  in  Nigeria  (see  section  on 

Offerings). 

"  When  a  ruler  was  defunct  in  the  pagan  district  of  this   ancient  realm,  a 

passage  sloping  downwards  for  about  thirty  feet  from   the  cast  and  west  is  cut 


_    J 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


121 


towards  the  hut  in  which  the  deceased  is  lying  in  state.  These  galleries  are  about 
six  feet  high,  twelve  yards  long  from  their  mouths  to  the  point  where  they  meet, 
and  for  a  distance  of  four  yards  or  so  the  walls  and  floor  of  their  upper  end  are 
lined  with  planks  of  Borassus  wood  to  prevent  their  falling  in.  But,  first  and 
foremost,  a  vaultec^  chamber  is  dug  out  exactly  beneath  the  hut  in  which  the  dead 
ruler  is  lying-in-state ;  that  is  to  say,  at  the  coincidence  of  the  eastern  and  western 
galleries,  and  its  roof  is  built  in  the  shape  of  a  wicker  basket,  with  horizontal  rings 
and  vertical  ribs,  and  lined  with  straw  and  matting.  Altogether  about  three 
hundred  men  are  employed  ;  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  whom  fell  the  timber,  fifty 
plait  and  bind,  and  fifty  more  do  the  digging  until  the  entire  construction  is 
complete." 


Section  of  a  Tumulus  on  the  Niger  Bend. 
From  Frobenius,  Voice  of  Africa,  Plate  II. 

"The  traveller  frequently  sees  red  mounds  rising  on  the  pale  yellow  sandy  soil 
in  the  region  of  the  Lower  Senegal  and  Northern  Houssa-land,  between  13°  and 
18°  N.,  of  which  the  oddity,  artificiality,  and  unnaturalness  must,  I  fancy,  strike  all 
beholders." 

"  The  measurement  of  these  '  red  heads '  varies  considerably.  It  rises  from 
between  sixteen  and  seventeen  feet  in  height  and  sixty-six  feet  in  basal  diameter, 
to  nearly  seventy  and  two  hundred  and  twenty-one  and  a-half  feet  in  height  and 
width  respectively ;  but  their  average  height  is  thirty-six  feet,  and  their  diameter 
one  hundred  and  twenty  feet." 

For  the  fact  that  these  are  royal  tombs  "  we  should  only  have  to 

turn  to  the  pages  of  the  old  Arab  voyager,  El  Bekri,  who  visited  these  parts  in 
1050  A.D.,  to  be  convinced  of  its  truth.  This  admirable  explorer  states  that  the 
natives  of  the.se  parts  buried  their  kings  in  great  domed  buildings  beneath  a  roof  of 
clay,  and  hid  them  beneath  an  earthen  mound,  from  whose  interior  a  passage  led 
into  the  open  air  in  this  way  ;  sacrifices  and,  in  fact,  human  sacrifices  and  intoxi- 
cating liquors  were  offered  to  the  dead  through  this  channel." 

"  Thus  everything  goes  to  prove  that  once  upon  a  time  these  tumuli  were  of 
different  kinds : 

"  Firstly,  a  small  type  ;  a  clay  covering  built  over  an  underground  mortuary 
hut. 

"  Secondly,  an  intermediate  type  ;  consisting  of  two  spaces,  the  lower  one  being 
a  grave  under  the  solid  earth  above  it,  and  the  upper  one  a  place  of  sacrifice  under 
the  earth,  which  was  piled  up  above  it  for  a  roof;  and 

"  Thirdly,  extraordinarily  large  constructions  for  the  reception  of  a  great  number 
of  notabilities,  besides  royal  personages,  in  chambers  of  some  size  according  to 
regulations  in  those  cases  provided. 


122 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


"  I  shall  try  to  describe  the  manner  in  which  one  of  these  edifices  was  built : 
First  of  all,  passages  were  dug  under  the  earth  and,  at  their  coincidence,  the  gallery 
was  enlarged,  as  the  first  sketch  of  a  building  with  an  oval-shaped  dome.  This 
dome  was  panelled  and  strengthened  with  wood  from  the  Borassus  palm.  This 
domed  underground  vault  contained  the  dead  man  and  a  good  many  things  besides. 
As  a  rule,  living  victims  accompanied  the  ruler  to  his  grave  and  died  there,  of  whom 
accounts  agree  that  there  may  have  been  as  many  as  four.  The  number  is  variously 
stated.  The  eastern  hole  was  filled  in,  but  the  western  one  was  sealed  with  boards 
and  only  opened  yearly  to  receive  fresh  offerings.  A  second  and  very  strong  dome, 
to  which  a  covered  passage  gave  access  from  the  west,  was  raised  on  the  surface 
exactly  over  the  roof  of  the  grave  chamber  proper.  The  vaulted  roof  and  passage 
were  made  of  stout  stems  of  Borassus  palm,  plastered  with  puddled  clay,  and  the 
mound  was  piled  high  over  the  whole." 

"  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  work  was  done  layer  by  layer.  Each  one  was 
sprinkled  with  bullock's  blood,  puddled  and  baked.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
'red-heads'  in  some  places  can  be  seen  to  be  laminating,  '  scaling'  as  a  block  of 
granite  peels  off  in  the  tropics.  Then  a  circular  trench  was  drawn  round  the  entire 
construction  and  connected  with  a  purifying  drain,  which  apparently  ran  eastwards. 
The  entrance  to  the  grave  itself,  which  was  opened  but  once  a  year  for  the  insertion 
of  the  autumnal  offering,  was  covered  with  planks  laid  horizontally.  But  on  all 
other  occasions  the  priests  held  intercourse  with  the  dead  in  the  upper  chamber, 
approach  to  which  could  be  gained  by  the  covered  way  on  the  level  ground." 
(F.,  21-25.) 

"In  Old-Ojo  the  procedure  is  different.  A  trench  was  dug  with  passages 
eastwards  and  westwards,  and  a  mound  was  thrown  up  over  its  central  point. 
According  to  all  descriptions,  I  may  assume  that  this  form  of  sepulture  corresponds 
to  that  of  the  Binis  of  the  Sougai,  as  set  forth  and  illustrated  in  Chapter  I "  (the 
preceding  account).     (F.,  184.) 

The  close  resemblance  to  the  principle  of  the  Egyptian  Royal  Tombs  hardly 
needs  comment.  There  is  the  subterranean  chamber,  reached  by  a  sloping  passage ; 
the  piling  up  of  layers  of  mud  over  it,  like  the  pile  of  sand  or  brickwork  over  the 
early  tombs  in  Egypt ;  and  the  temenos  wall  around  it. 


Offerings  for  the  dead. 

12.  Beer  and  flour  offerings. — "The  offerings  usually  consist  of  native  beer  and 
maize  flour  .  .  .  Usually  the  stones  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  (a  sacred  one)  support 
one  or  more  pots  of  native  beer  made  of  millet,  and  there  is  either  a  little  basket  of 


t= 

==7 

, 

1 


Dish  of  Flour  on  a  Mat. 
Holep,  emblem  of  peace  or  satisfaction. 


Jar  of  Beer 
usually  offered. 


ZAV^VAVM 

Strips  of  Linen 
usually  offered. 


flour  or  some  is  poured  in  a  heap  on  the  ground."     (W.,  52-3.)     Beer  was  one  of 
the  principal  offerings  stated  on  early  Egyptian  steles,  and  the  jug;used  for  beer  is 


Egypt  in  Africa.  123 

constantly  figured  among  offerings.  The  flour  offering  was  so  essential  that  the 
pan  piled  up  with  flour,  and  placed  on  a  mat,  became  the  typical  hieroglyph  for  an 
offering,  hetep,  and  hence  arose  the  derived  meanings  "  to  satisfy  "  and  "  to  make 
peace." 

13.  Cloth  offering. — "Sometimes  also  calico  (is  offered).  .  .  It  is  torn  in 
strips  lest  it  should  be  appropriated."  (W.,  52-3.)  "  In  all  cases  of  prophetic 
announcements  ...  by  the  high  priests  or  kings,  white  baft  is  always  offered." 
(L.,  456.)  Likewise,  in  Egypt,  beside  the  food  offerings,  linen  cloth,  in  narrow 
strips,  was  always  offered  to  the  dead  ;  this  is  represented  in  the  early  lists  of 
offerings,  and  in  later  times  by  the  kings,  as  at  Deir  el-Bahri  and  Abydos. 

14.  Offerings  at  the  grave. — "  It  is  customary  to  bury  implements,  weapons, 
insignia  of  office,  ornaments  and  other  articles,  .  .  .  wooden  or  clay  images,  in 
addition  to  the  sacrificial  victims,  human  and  animal."  (L.,  175-7.)  "  The  deceased's 
personal  possessions  are  put  into  the  grave  with  him  before  the  earth  is  filled  in." 
(W.,  1 59-) 

In  the  sepulchral  chamber  of  the  great  royal  tombs  with  sloping  passages, 
"  four  candlesticks,  each  of  them  pointing  to  a  quarter  of  the  compass,  are  set  up 
round  the  body,  and,  as  soon  as  the  departed  ruler  is  laid  to  rest  and  all  other 
necessary  arrangements  are  made,  the  candles  are  lighted.  Besides  this,  large  and 
small  vessels  of  Duo — that  is,  drink — and  all  kinds  of  food  and  grain  are  placed  to 
hand  in  various  receptacles.  If  it  was  a  warrior  chief  who  here  found  his  last  abode, 
his  bows  and  arrows  and  fly-whisk  were  put  into  the  grave.  In  the  first  place,  the 
favourite  wife  of  every  ruler  bore  him  company  .... 

"  An  earthenware  tube  or  pillar  was  placed  in  the  funeral  hut  above  the  chamber 
in  which  the  dead  man  had  lain  in  state  at  first.  It  was  erected  on  the  exact  spot 
beneath  which  his  head  had  rested  in  the  actual  death  chamber.  Trenches  were 
also  cut  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  mortuary  hut.  These,  however,  did  not  open 
into  the  vault  itself,  but  only  served  for  the  storage  of  extra  food-stuffs  in  jugs  and 
cups,  and  other  articles  in  common  use,  such  as  tobacco  pipes,  ewers  and  even  fire- 
wood. Such  things  were  meant  to  please  the  dead  and  to  refresh  him  when  the 
supplies  in  the  grave  itself  had  run  out.  The  wood  would  enable  him  to  kindle 
a  fire  to  warm  himself  in  the  cold  season.  All  these  preparations  made,  the 
eastern  and  western  galleries  were  sealed  on  the  inside  with  stout  lattices,  and 
the  earth  piled  over  them.  The  north  and  south  galleries  were  also  filled  in." 
(F.,  21-2.) 

The  parallel  to  the  offerings  made  in  Egyptian  graves  is  complete.  Not  only 
are  the  deposits  of  food,  of  furniture,  and  of  weapons  alike,  but  also  the  providing 
of  store  rooms  adjoining  the  burial,  as  in  the  Royal  Tombs  at  Abydos. 

15.  Killing  the  offerifigs. — Near  Blantyre  "on  the  graves  were  laid  broken 
sifting-baskets,  handles  of  hoes,  and  pots,  these  last  with  a  hole  in  the  bottom  of 
each."  (W.,  155.)  "  When  all  is  finished,  the  women  lay  theofferings  on  the  grave, 
also  the  deceased's  water  jar,  in  which  a  hole  is  made,  and  gourd  drinking  cup, 
which  is  broken."  (W.,  159.)  Thus,  in  Egypt,  offerings  in  tombs  and  graves  are 
frequently  found  deliberately  broken,  even  where  buried  quite  out  of  sight  and  not 
liable  to  be  stolen. 

16.  Offering  chamber  above  grave. — See  li.  Sloping  passage  tomb,  where  the 
upper  chamber  for  receiving  offerings  is  on  the  ground  level,  and  was  always 
accessible  ;  like  the  funeral  chapel  of  the  Egyptian  tombs. 

17.  Drain  to  the  east  from  the  offering  chamber,  see  1 1.  This  is  like  the  drain 
to  the  east  from  the  temple  of  Khufu's  pyramid. 


124 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


1 8.  Men  sacrificed  at  royal  funeral,  see  il. — "  As  a  rule,  living  victims  accom- 
panied the  ruler  to  his  grave  and  died  there." 
(F.,  24.)  "  When  a  king  dies  many  of  his  wives  are 
thrown  alive  into  the  grave."  (H.,  88.)  At  Abydos 
we  found  that  the  burials  which  surrounded  King  Qa 
were  made  before  the  brick  chambers  were  hard, 
so  that  the  walls  squeezed  down  over  them,  and  it 
seems  that  the  servants  were  killed  all  together  at 
the  funeral.  The  human  sacrifices  appear  to  have 
been  retained  in  the  royal  burials  of  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty,  and  the  tekmi  appears  to  have  been  a  mock 
human  sacrifice  in  private  tombs  of  the  same  age. 

19.  Eldest  son  tlie  family  priest. — "The  person 
of  the  eldest  son  as  priest  to  the  family  is  sacred." 
(L.,  68.)  At  the  funeral  "  the  eldest  son,  or  elected 
successor,  ....  acts  as  master  of  the  ceremonies, 
and  performs  the  sacrifice  ....  (along  with)  the  sons 
of  the  deceased  dressed  up  as  priests."  (L.,  163-4.) 
"  The  ancient  custom  is  .  .  .  the  first-born  son 
represents  the  family  in  the  flesh,  his  father  the 
family  in  the  spirit  .  .  .  The  first-born  son  is  con- 
sidered sacred  and  occupies  during  his  father's  life- 
time the  position  of  family  and  officiating  priest. 
When  household  sacrifices  are  to  be  performed,  he 
always  officiates,  especially  on  the  death  of  his  father, 
in  cutting  the  throats  of  the  victims."     (L.,  395.) 

So  in  Egypt  the  eldest  son  was  the  family  priest, 
the  an-mut-f  ox  "  pillar  of  his  mother"  ;  while  all  the 
sons  joined  in  sacrificing  the  ox  at  the  father's  funeral, 
as  shown  at  Deshasheh. 

20.  Tlie  funeral  image. — "  Everywhere  among 
the  Ibo,  as  well  as  among  the  other  tribes,  the  same 
practices,  therefore  the  same  beliefs,  as  I  have  found, 

prevail  as  to  .  .  .  the  necessity  for  the  funeral  sacrament  in  order  to  liberate  the 
dormant  soul  from  the  clutch  of  the  Death-god,  and  transport  it  from  the  regions  of  the 


Eldest  Son  Offering. 
Temple   of  Abybos. 


The  Sons  Sacrificing  thf.  Bum,  at  thf;  Father's  Funeral. 
Deshasheh,  Vlth  dynasty. 


J 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


125 


dead  to  the  land  of  the  li%'ing  spirits.  Among  the  New  Calabar  people  the  external  or 
ceremonial  aspect  of  this  ancient  rite  is  much  more  elaborate  than  it  is  among  most 
of  the  other  tribes  .  .  .  One  year  after  the  death  of  a  chief,  or  consequential  person, 
...  his  son  .  .  will  secure  the  '  Duen-fubara,'  i.e.,  an  image  representing  the  head 
and  shoulders  of  the  late  deceased,  or  his  figure  in  a  sitting  posture.  This,  which 
is  carved  out  of  wood  and  painted  with  different  dyes,  in  imitation  of  the  face  and 
head,  surmounts  a  large  wooden  base  or  tray  that,  as  a  rule,  is  placed  in  a  recess. 
It  is  also  usual  to 
place  not  more  than 
two  smaller  images, 
one  on  either  side, 
representing  sons  or 
near  relations  of  the 
late     deceased,     who 

may   have    died  sub-     ^^^^—f.         ""^^^^^^^^K  xA 

sequently  to  him.  On     ^^^K^  ^^^^^^^K  '^ 

this    tray,    and     sur-     ^^^K  ^^^B^Bt-  ^-^j^  \ 

rounding    the    heads,      ^^^K  '"C^l 

horns,    glasses,    pots,       ^^^^  "■ 

chairs,  and  as  many 
articles  of  this  des- 
cription as  can  be 
crammed  on  to  it,  are 
arranged  for  the  very 
evident  use  of  the 
spirit  father. 

"In  front  of  this 
pedestal  three  rudely 
made  altars  of  mud 
are  erected,  with  a 
hole  in  the  middle  of 
each,  for  the  purpose 
of  throwing  the  food 
and  libations  that  are 
constantly  offered  to 
the  presiding  spirits, 
who,  it  is  believed, 
eat  and  drink  of  them 
....  These  wooden 
images  "  are  made  by 
the  people  of  Fuchea,  "a  privilege  the  significance  of  which  can  only  be  measured 
and  appreciated  after  a  thorough  comprehension  of  the  ancestral  creed  and  the 
indispensable  importance  of  these  sacred  emblems  as  necessary  embodiments 
for  the  household  spirits.  The  day  on  which  the  image  is  finished,  or  rather 
delivered,  is  regarded  as  a  public  holiday  .  .  All  the  chiefs  .  .  .  accompany  the 
'Duen-fubara'  from  Fuchea  to  its  destination.  This  is  done  at  night,  for  custom 
forbids  the  landing  of  the  sacred  emblem  by  day.  ...  On  the  eighth  day  a  great 
sacrifice  of  goats  and  fowls  is  offered  up  by  the  late  chief's  household,  as  well 
as  by  all  those  intimate  friends  who  hold  his  memory  in  remembrance.  The  eldest 
son,  or  elected  successor,  by  virtue  of  his  office  acts  as  master  of  the  ceremonies, 


Limestone  Head,  as  found  isuried  in  Tombs  of  the 
IVth  Dynasty,  in  i'lace  of  a  whole  Funeral  Statue. 
University  College,  London. 


126 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


and  personally  performs  the  sacrifice  in  the  presence  of  the  people  and  the  '  Duen- 
fubara,'  over  which,  as  he  cuts  the  neck  of  each  separate  victim,  he  throws  and 
sprinkles  the  blood  ;  and  when  this  portion  of  the  ceremony  has  been  performed, 
the  flesh  is  cut  up  and  evenly  distributed  among  all  those  who  are  in  attendance. 

"  Following  next  in  order,  but  prior  to  its  removal  to  its  own  proper  and  final 
resting-place,  the  most  interesting  feature  of  the  whole  ceremony  takes  place." 

21.  The  tall  straw  hat  of  the  officiants. — "  The  sons  of  the  deceased  dressed  up 
as  priests,  their  faces  marked  all  over  with  the  sacred  chalk,  on  their  heads  the  large 
and  exceedingly  high  native-made  straw  hats,  and  a  fathom  of  white  baft  tied  round 
their  waists  .  .  .  proceed  in  a  body  to  the  chief's  quarter,  in  which  the  '  Duen-fubara' 
has  been  deposited."  (.A  mock  fight  follows.)  "  The  invaders  are  allowed  to  take 
over  the  now  blood-stained  and  consecrated  image.  This  is  done  in  a  formal 
manner  ...  A  procession  is  then  formed,  and  the  emblem  conveyed  in  state  to 
the  quarter  which  has  been  prepared  for  it  ...  .  The  spirit  of  the  late  liberated 
in  his  present  dual  capacity  of  spiritual  head  and  mediator  or  communicator,  is 
absolutely  indispensable  to  the  household."     (L.,  162-4.) 


Dancers  at  a  Funeral  wearing  tall  hats  of  straw  or  rushes. 
Tomb  of  Xllth  dynasty.     Kamesseum,  Plate  IX. 

22.  The  offering  chamber  for  the  image. — "  The  New  Calabar  natives  erect  a 
new  house  over  the  remains  of  the  late  departed,  the  hall  of  which  becomes  an 
ancestral  chapel  in  which  is  also  deposited  the  '  Duen-fubara,'  or  image  of  the 
deceased,  to  whom  offerings  and  petitions  are  weekly  oiTered  up." 

"  The  Ibibio,  however,  erect  large  monuments  in  prominent  places  .  .  .  Two 
small  mud  chambers  with  wooden  doors  that  are  always  kept  securely  locked  or 
fastened,  are  built  at  the  sides  for  the  sole  use  of  the  dead  man's  spirit." 

"  The  Aro  or  Inoku  too,  bury  their  nobles  in  prominent  places  .  .  .  and 
offerings  of  food  and  medicines  are  regularly  placed  in  two  holes  which  are  made  in 
front  of  the  mound."  (L.,  182-3.)  Compare  the  two  holes  for  oiTering  on  Egyptian 
altars. 

"  On  arrival  at  the  mausoleum  the  '  Duen-fubara '  is  placed  in  the  hall  or  outer 
room  of  a  house  which  has  been  specially  built  for  the  purpose  .  .  .  the  embryo 
house-chapel — now  consecrated  by  the  spiritual  presence,  which  has  been  previously 
invoked  and  conjured  into  this  special  emblem — is  daily  swept  and  kept  clean." 

"  There  are  three  prominent  landmarks  .  .  The  first  is  that  the  ceremony  is 
.  .  .  the  identical  memorial  service  in  honour  of  the  dead  which  is  common  to  one 
and  all  of  these  different  tribes,  only  modified  in  this  case  with  regard  to  human 
.sacrifices,  owing  to  the  deterrent  effect  of  civilised  rule.     The  second  is,  .  .  .  the 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


127 


purely  spiritual  function  of  securing  the  passage  of  the  soul  from  the  land  of  death 
to  the  land  of  spirits  .  .  .  The  third  is  that  it  is  the  consecration  of  the  now 
released  .  .  .  and  sanctified  spirit,  in  his  new  position  as  spirit  father  and  mediator 
of  the  household,  a  position  which,  apart  from  his  own  personality,  entitles  him  to 
a  daily  adoration  and  a  still  more  important  weekly  worship."     (L.,  162-5.) 

"  Where  a  new  house  is  built  over  the  remains  (the  mausoleum  described  above) 
certain  things  are  removed  (from  the  living  house)  to  the  new  tenement,  and  placed 
along  with  the  '  Duen-fubara '  in  the  ancestral  chapel."  (L.,  286.)  The  close 
parallel  to  the  funereal  figure  placed  in  the  ancestral  chapel  in  Egypt  is  obvious. 
The  image  of  the  head  alone  is  sometimes  found  in  the  IVth  dynasty  tombs,  and 
the  figure  with  those  of  the  children  is  the  regular  feature  of  the  tomb  chapels,  even 
down  to  the  XlXth  dynasty.  The  special  tall  headdress  of  the  officiating  sons,  and 
their  joint  sacrifice  of  the  funeral  ox, 
are  familiar.  The  tomb  chapel,  its  altars 
for  offering,  and  the  worship  there  given 
to  the  ancestral  image,  are  all  so  closely 
parallel  in  Egypt  and  Africa,  that  it 
would  be  reasonable  to  accept  the  account 
of  the  modern  ceremonies  as  explaining 
to  us  the  ancient  ritual. 

23.  The  soul  house. — "  Chipoka  had 
been  a  person  of  importance,  ...  a 
ceremony  was  to  take  place  for  propitia- 
ting the  old  chiefs  spirit  .  .  .  people 
were  busied  about  a  group  of  neat  minia- 
ture huts,  made  of  gra.ss,  about  two  feet  high.  The  roofs  of  these  huts,  which  had 
been  finished  separately,  were  not  yet  put  on,  and  I  could  see  that  a  couple  of 
earthen  jars  were  sunk  in  the  ground  inside  each.  These  jars  were  now  filled  with 
beer,  and  then  the  roof  was  lifted  on  .  .  .  I  have  more  than  once  seen  these  little 
spirit  huts  in  villages."  (W.,  47-8.)  "  Of  the  things  which  the  stranger  can  see 
for  himself  in  passing  through  the  villages  the  most  noticeable  are  the  little  spirit 
houses  .  .  .  where  sacrifices  are  presented  from  time  to  time."     (W.,  50.) 

In  the  IXth-XIth  dynasties  in  Egypt,  the  system  of  placing  soul  houses  by 
the  grave  became  common  in  some  places.  These  model  houses  of  baked  pottery 
are  of  every  degree,  from  the  slightest  shelters,  up  to  two-story  houses  with  many 
chambers,  offerings  and  servants.  How  far  such  a  system  may  have  been  prevalent 
at  other  periods  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  If  made  in  perishable  material, 
such  soul  houses  as  those  of  the  modern  Africans  would  entirely  disappear. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


Typical  Egyptian  Altar  with  two  holes 
FOR  THE  Offerings. 


( To  be  continued^ 


(     128     ) 


THE   NEW    LAW   ON   THE   ANTIQUITIES   OF   EGYPT. 

Unfortunately  for  archaeology,  the  legal  questions  of  the  claims  of  Governments 
on  antiquities,  and  the  complications  of  dealers  and  valuers,  are  continually  inter- 
fering with  the  progress  of  science.  Perhaps  no  other  subject  of  research  is 
hampered  with  equal  restrictions,  legal  and  social.  The  discoverer  in  chemistry,  in 
geology,  in  astronomy,  has  no  Government  imposing  licences  and  demanding  half 
or  the  whole  of  the  results  of  his  labour.  If  the  chemist  or  electrician  makes 
a  discovery  of  commercial  value,  he  may  have  both  his  honours  and  his  cash  for  it ; 
but  an  archaeologist  who  made  any  personal  profit  would  lose  caste  at  once. 

The  entire  prohibition  of  all  export  of  antiquities  in  Turkey  and  Greece,  only 
produces  a  permanent  and  well -organised,  though  hidden,  route  to  every  European 
museum.  The  bar  on  exportation  from  Italy  is  almost  as  effective  in  maintaining 
a  .systematic  transport.  In  Egypt,  since  M.  Masi'ERO  began  his  rule  in  1880, 
a  more  rational  claim  has  prevailed.  The  Government  has  only  barred  the  export 
of  objects  really  needed  for  the  Cairo  Museum,  and  returned  the  purchase  money  to 
the  owner.  Excavation  in  private  land  was  free;  and  in  Government  land 
permission  was  given  to  excavate  on  half  shares  with  the  Museum. 

Last  year  a  new  codification  of  the  law  was  issued,  which  is  of  much  importance 
to  both  excavators  and  purchasers  of  antiquities.  The  new  principle  which  is  most 
surprising  in  this  law  is  the  claim  of  the  Government  to  appropriate  all  antiquities 
under  the  soil,  in  private  as  well  as  public  land.  This  seizure  of  all  such  property, 
formerly  private,  is  unexampled  in  any  other  country  ;  no  precedent  exists  elsewhere 
for  such  claims.  The  practical  effect  of  it  is  to  stop  all  the  very  costly  clearances 
of  deep  temple  sites  which  are  in  private  property.  Hitherto  the  whole  returns  from 
such  sites  as  Memphis  and  Heliopolis  were  a  scanty  reward  for  the  difficult  and 
expensive  task  of  working  under  water.  If  only  one  half  of  the  proceeds  may  be 
received,  all  such  work  is  arrested. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  new  law  it  is  stated  that  the  penalties  laid  down  only 
apply  to  persons  of  Egyptian  or  Turkish  nationality.  The  immediate  result  has 
been  the  transfer  of  dealing,  really  or  nominally,  to  foreigners.  Two  of  the  best- 
known  dealers  from  the  Pyramids  now  have  a  prominent  shop  in  Cairo  with  an 
Italian  name  over  the  door.  The  effect  of  a  stringent  law,  only  applicable  to 
natives,  will  be  to  put  the  whole  of  the  dealing  in  the  hands  of  Greeks,  Italians,  and 
others ;  and  to  throw  all  native  dealers  into  foreign  partnerships.  A  nominal 
partnership  will  confer  immunity  from  the  law  on  any  native,  as  he  can  then  plead 
agency,  the  property  being  foreign.  This  is  altogether  an  unsatisfactory  state  of 
affairs. 

The  definitions  of  antiquities  are  of  the  most  sweeping  kind  ;  they  include  all 
manifestations  and  products  of  arts,  sciences,  literatures,  religions,  manners  and 
industries,  of  all  ages  down  to  Coptic.  This  definition  is  expanded  in  detail  to 
cover  not  only  all  it  might  be  supposed  to  include,  but  also  scattered  blocks  or 
bricks,  chips  of  stone,  sand,  chips  of  pottery,  and  earth  from  towns  {sebakli).  But 
the  law  allows  that  objects  already  in  private  collections,  or  subsequently  shared 
with  the  discoverers  by  the  Government,  may  be  sold. 


The  New  Law  o?i  the  Antiquities  of  Egypt.  129 

The  Government  is  entitled  to  expropriate  any  land  containing  antiquities,  on 
paying  a  valuation,  and  ten  per  cent.  over.  Any  discoverer  of  a  fixed  monument  is 
bound  to  inform  the  department,  and  wait  six  weeks  to  know  if  it  is  claimed. 

Any  portable  object,  accidentally  found,  must  be  given  up  within  six  days,  the 
finder  to  receive  half  the  value.  If  not  settled  by  consent,  this  half  will  be  settled 
by  the  Department  arranging  two  halves,  and  giving  the  finder  the  choice.  Or  if 
the  Department  requires  to  keep  more,  then  it  may  name  a  value,  and,  if  accepted, 
it  will  then  pay  half  to  the  finder  ;  or,  if  not  accepted,  the  finder  must  name  a  value, 
and  the  Department  will  pay  half  and  keep  the  objects,  or  require  the  finder  to  pay 
half  and  take  the  objects.  This  procedure  also  applies  to  all  discoveries  made  by 
scientific  excavators. 

For  dealers,  a  permit  is  requisite.  Every  dealer  must  keep  a  day  book  with 
entry  of  every  object  over  £^  in  value,  with  all  details  of  dimensions,  material, 
colour,  etc. ;  the  purchaser's  name  is  to  be  filled  in,  and  every  page  of  the  register 
to  be  sealed  by  the  Inspector  of  Antiquities.  Nothing  may  be  sold  outside  of  the 
shop  licensed,  or  carried  about  without  an  authorisation  of  the  Department.  The 
Inspector  may,  by  day  or  night,  raid  every  place  belonging  to  a  dealer,  to  verify 
his  stock  and  register.  All  of  this  seems  to  have  been  devised  without  reference  to 
practical  conditions. 

Regular  excavations  must  be  sanctioned  by  the  Minister  of  Public  Works,  on 
the  proposal  of  the  Director,  after  acceptance  by  the  Committee  of  Egyptology. 
Temporary  searches  for  less  than  a  month  may  be  sanctioned  by  the  Director. 
Permission  will  only  be  granted  to  savants  delegated  by  public  bodies,  or  to  private 
persons  who  may  present  sufficient  guarantees.  This  is  a  wide  term,  which  has 
already  included  native  dealers  and  other  most  unsatisfactory  diggers.  Only  two 
sites  may  be  held  by  the  representatives  of  one  body  :  a  proviso  which  is  already 
neglected.  Every  permit  must  be  worked  for  at  least  two  months  in  each  season, 
on  one  or  both  of  the  sites. 

Taking  wet  squeezes,  or  any  other  damaging  process,  is  prohibited  ;  but  no 
bar  is  laid  on  tracing  or  dry  squeezes.  Many  formal  and  minor  regulations  are  also 
laid  down ;  but  those  quoted  here  will  suffice  to  show  the  main  points  where 
a  purchaser  or  an  intending  excavator  will  come  in  touch  with  the  law. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(     130    ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Zeitschrift  fur  Aegyptische  Sprache,   50  Band.     191 2. 

{Continued  from  p.  83.) 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm. — Demotische  Inschrift  auf  einem  Sargbrett. 
(i  illustration.)  The  inscription,  which  is  of  the  second  half  of  the  Ptolemaic 
Period,  gives  several  names  by  which  the  genealogy  of  the  owner  of  the  coffin  can 
be  constructed. 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm. — Ein  Sargbrett  mit  hieroglyphisch-deinotischer 
Inschrift.     (i    illustration.)     The  importance  of  this  inscription  is  that  the  name 

*j|  I   is  given  in  the  demotic  Pa-na-nekhter  or  X\avexaTr)<i,  "  He  of  the  Power." 

The  figure  which  is  usually  the  determinative  of  a  demon  is  here  read  nekht, 
"  Power." 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm.— Eine  Weikinscltrift  an  Ameiwphis,  den  Sohn  des 
Paapis.  (2  illustrations.)  The  corner  of  an  offering  table  of  dark  granite.  On  the 
front  edge  is  the  demotic  inscription  :  "  Amenhotep,  son  of  Hapi,  give  life  to " 

Spiegelberg,  Wilhelm.  Xe<j€^aiT]ov.  In  an  ostrakon  published  by 
Wilcken  there  is  mention  of  an  oath  sworn  in  a  temple  called  Xeo-e/Sati/or,  i.e.,  the 
temple  of  a  god  Xeo-ejSat.  Wilcken  recognised  in  this  word  the  name  of  the  god 
Khons  and  suggested  that  the  remainder  of  the  name  was  >ib  Ha.  Revillout  has 
published  a  demotic  text  in  which  the  name  Ptak  neb  Ha  is  found  ;  the  demotic 

shows   that   the  title  was  in  hieroglyphs  ^c::7  §  nb  o/iou,    "  Lord  of  Time," 

a  title  applied  naturally  to  the  moon-god  Thoth,  and  his  Theban  form  of  Khons. 
Xea-  then  is  the  name  of  Khons  with  elision  of  the  n  before  s,  of  which  there  are 
several  examples  known.     The  n  of  nb  is  also  elided  as  in  -ap/3ecr'x^ivi^  Hr-nb-sekhem. 

The  whole  name  Xea-e^ai  is  therefore     ®     I  ^3:7  ©  "  Khonsu,  Lord  of  Time." 

Gardiner,  Alan  H. —  T/ie  Stele  of  Bilgai.  (i  illustration.)  This  stele  presents 
many  points  of  interest.  It  records  the  endowment  of  a  chapel  and  a  house 
dedicated  to  the  Amon  of  Usermaresetepnre.  The  chapel  appears  to  have  been 
founded  by  a  queen  whose  name  has  been  carefully  erased  ;  the  feminine  pronouns 
and  the  feminine  endings  have  also  been  effaced.  The  name  of  a  Pharaoh,  too,  has 
been  intentionally  destroyed.  As  the  date  is  of  the  Ramesside  Period  and  obviously 
later  than  Rameses  II,  the  evidence  points  to  the  queen  being  Ta-usert,  as  she  is 
the  only  queen  of  this  era  who  was  sufficiently  involved  in  dynastic  feuds  for  her 
name  to  be  erased  by  her  successors.  The  endowment  was  placed  under  the  charge 
of  "  the  Commander  of  the  Fortress  of  the  Sea,  whosoever  he  may  be  " ;  a  curse  is 
pronounced  upon  this  official  should  he  fail  in  his  duties,  and  a  blessing  invoked 
upon  him  should  he  fulfil  them.  "  The  language  of  the  stele  is  the  mixture  of  the 
literary  and  the  spoken  dialects  usual  on  Ramesside  monuments." 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  131 

Sethe,    Kurt. — Das    Fehlen    des    Begriffs    der  Blutschande  bei  den   alten 
Aegyptern.     In  A.Z.,  XLIX,  97,   Prof.  Sethe  suggested  that  in  the  well-known 

genealogy  in  the  grave  of  Kha-f-Snefru  at  Gizeh —  ^^^  (    P  J  "^  ^     ^^    '^ 


writing  for  ^^   I  «~wva  "  their   son,"   which   shows   that   Snefru   married   his   own 

eldest  daughter.  In  consequence  of  the  protest  which  this  opinion  has  provoked, 
Prof  Sethe  here  recapitulates  his  statement,  and  brings  forward  further  proofs. 
The  tomb  of  the  father  of  Kha-f-Snefru  lies  beside  the  tomb  of  Kha-f-Snefru  himself, 
and  undoubtedly  belongs  to  the  same  Nefer-maat  who  was  the  son  of  Snefru  and 
Nefert-kau.  The  objection,  that  Nefer-maat  was  the  son  of  Cheops  and  not  of 
Snefru,  cannot  be  admitted  owing  to  the  fact  that  Cheops  is  so  seldom  mentioned 
in  the  family  of  Kha-f-Snefru  as  to  be  practically  omitted,  while  Snefru  is  of  great 
importance ;  it  is  altogether  unthinkable  that  the  grandfather  should  be  honoured, 
while  the  king,  beside  whose  pyramid  the  tomb  was  placed,  should  be  passed  over 
in  silence.  This  Nefer-maat  is  probably  the  same  as  the  prince  of  the  same  name 
whose  tomb  was  at  Medum,  and  who  was  undoubtedly  the  son  of  Snefru.  The 
reason  for  the  existence  of  the  two  tombs  was  probably  due  to  the  abandonment  of 
the  Medum  tomb  when  Snefru  abandoned  his  pyramid  there.  If,  then,  Nefer-maat 
was  the  son  of  Snefru  by  Snefru's  marriage  with  his  own  daughter,  it  is  obvious  that 
such  connections  were  not  held  in  the  same  detestation  as  among  the  Hebrews, 
Greeks,  Romans,  and,  later  on,  the  Christians. 


BURCHARDT,  MAX. — Zzvei  Bronzeschwerter  aus  Aegypten.  (i  plate,  2  illus- 
trations.) Two  swords  in  the  Berlin  Museum,  both  found  in  Egypt,  and  apparently 
of  the  same  type,  with  parallel  edges.  One,  which  is  complete,  is  of  the  type  of 
sword  found  in  North  and  Middle  Europe,  and  dating  to  period  M.  Ill  of  the 
Bronze  Age  {i.e.,  according  to  Montelius,  1400  to  1200  B.C.).  The  other  is  engraved 
on  one  side  with  the  cartouches  of  Sety  II,  showing  that  both  are  of  the  same 
period.  The  true  sword  is  not  an  Egyptian  weapon ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  in 
the  scenes  both  foreigners  and  Egyptians  are  armed  with  swords  of  Aegean  and 
Mycenaean  types,  while  the  swords  actually  found  in  Egypt  are  of  the  North- 
European   type.     The    only   sword    which   was   adopted   by  the    Egyptians   (so 

completely  adopted  that  it  became  an  emblem  of  victory)  was  the  _  or  scimetar. 

The   true   sword   is     I  \v    in    Egyptian,   a  feminine   word    which    must   be 

distinguished  from  the  masculine  form  which  means  a  knife. 


Von  BissiNG,  F.  W. — Die  dltcste  Darstellung  eines  Skeletts.  (4  illustrations.) 
The  author  discusses  the  opinion  of  various  authorities  on  the  statement  of 
Diodorus  that  a  mummy  was  introduced  at  the  feasts  of  the  Egyptians,  and 
suggests  that  the  small  figure  in  his  collection  may  throw  light  on  the  subject.  It 
is  carved  in  light-brown  wood,  and  is  i^  inches  long.  It  represents  an  unwrapped 
mummy,  the  bones  being  clearly  though  conventionally  shown  as  if  under  the  skin. 
The  case,  which  contains  the  figure,  is  also  of  wood ;  it  is  in  the  form  of  an  obelisk, 
pierced  with  a  hole  at  the  top,  as  if  it  were  to  be  worn  as  an  amulet  suspended  on 
the  person.     The  date  is  of  the  late  period,  though  hardly  so  late  as  the  Greek  era. 

I  2 


132  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegj'ptische  Sprache. 

BlacKMAN,  a.  M.  —Remarks  on  an  Incense  Brazier  depicted  in  ThuUtetep's 
Tomb  at  El-Bersheh.  (13  illustrations.)  The  object,  called- a  fan  by  Newberry 
{El-Bersheh,  I,  PI.  XV,  p.  20),  is  here  proved  to  be  the  cover  of  a  censer.  This  was 
suggested  in  1905  by  Murray  {Saqqara  Mastabas,  I,  PI.  XXI,  p.  22).  The  proofs 
brought  forward  in  this  paper  are  (i)  the  respective  forms  of  fans  and  censer-lids  as 
shown  in  the  tombs,  (2)  the  actual  censers  and  lids  found  by  Randall- Mac  I  ver  at 
Buhen,  one  lid  being  pierced  with  holes  to  permit  the  escape  of  the  smoke,  (3)  the 
hieroglyphic  determinative  ^-<la  of  the  word  kop,  "  to  fumigate,"  (4)  the  modern 
practice,  as  experienced  by  both  Lane  and  the  author,  of  censing  a  guest  with 
a  censer  having  a  pierced  cover. 

Blackman,  a.  M. —  The  significance  of  Incense  and  Libations  in  Funerary  and 
Temple  Ritual.  Incense  and  the  libations  of  water  were  offered  in  order  to  bring 
back  to  the  corpse  the  fluid  which  had  been  dried  out  of  it,  and  thus  to  re-vivify  the 
dead.     Quotations  are  given  from  the  Pyramid  Texts  to  show  that  the  water  offered 

to  the  dead  is  called  %^  f  i  "  moisture  of  the  god,"  and    |  %i  "^  "^   ^ 

<=>  ¥^      D    >  "  exudations  which  issued  from  Osiris  " ;  from  a  Middle  Kingdom 

Text  and  the  Ritual  of  Amon  to  show  that  incense  is  called  (J  W&    I  rjj , 

"  dew  of  the  god,"  and    1  c:^;^  ~wwv ,  "  sweat  of  the  god."     The  Pyramid  Texts  are 

also  cited  to  prove  that  the  god  in  question  was  Osiris,  and  that  the  water  used  was 
Nile  water.  The  author  notes  in  passing  that  libations  and  incense  were  offered  to 
the  gods  in  the  same  way  as  to  the  dead  ;  he  mentions  also  that  offerings  of  incense 
were  not  always  purificatory,  but  sometimes  sacramental,  whereby  the  offerer  could 
enter  into  communion  with  his  own  ka   and  with  the  gods  and  their  ka%. 


ROEDER,  GuNTHER. — Namensunterschriften  von  Kiinstlern  unter  Tempel- 
reliefs  in  Abu  Siinbel.  (2  illustrations.)  The  author  points  out  that  the  short, 
often  roughly  carved,  inscriptions  below  some  of  the  scenes  on  the  north-east,  east, 
and  north  walls  of  the  pillared  hall  at  Abu  Simbel,  are  the  names  of  the  artists  of 
those  scenes.  Names  of  the  artists  of  temples  and  royal  tombs  are  hitherto  quite 
unknown,  and  only  occasionally  in  a  private  tomb  has  the  artist  represented  himself, 
and  even  then  in  an  unobtrusive  manner  ;  it  is  only  at  a  late  period,  and  far  away 
in  barbarous  Nubia,  that  so  great  a  liberty  could  be  taken  in  a  sanctuary. 

Newberry,  Percy  E.— 77/^  Tree  of  the  Heracleopolite  Nome.  (8  illustrations.) 
The  emblem  of  the  Heracleopolite  Nome  is  a  tree  from  which  depends  a  long 
appendage,  which  is  here  shown  to  be  a  branch  ending  in  a  fruit  or  flower.  From 
the  drawing  of  a  fruiting  pomegranate  tree  in  the  tomb  of  Meryra  at  Tell  el-Amarna, 
it  is  obvious  that  it  is  identical  with  the  sacred  tree  of  Heracleopolis. 

Sethe,  Kurt. — Der  Name  des  Gottes  Suchos.    The  crocodile-god    I JN 


Sobk,  becomes  in  Greek  2ow;jj;o?,  and  in  the  construct-form  2e/c-,  less  often  So/c-, 
SuK-,  or  2/C6-.     The  elision  of  the  b,  which  to  us  appears  unusual,  is  well  known  in 

Egyptian,  e.g.,  R  A  ^^^^  -^ ,  Coptic  cobtg  becomes  Sw^t?,  ^^   |  ,  Babylonian 

Pa-ri-a-ma-khu-u.     The  change  of  the  b  in  the  name  Sobk  is  shown  in  the  New 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  133 

Kingdom  by  the  spelling     'JO  ^:=^  ^§\ .     The  Greek  form  with  u  suggests  that 

the  name  was  originally  Subk,  with  a  long  u ;  the  construct-form  most  in  use,  2e/c-, 
must  then  be  derived  from  a  shortened  form  2o«-,  or  Suk-.  This,  and  other  names 
of  gods,  show  that  the  Coptic  uj  originated  in  u. 

ROEDER,  GuNTHER. — Der  Name  und  das  Tier  des  Gottes  Set.     The  name  of 

this  god  is  spelt  I  ,',  'f^  ■  "^  '  ^^'  *  V  '  ^■^■'  S^*^^^^  o""  Setekh  in  early 
times,  abbreviated  later  to  Sute.  These  names  show  that  only  one  god  is  meant, 
and  that  he  is  identical  with  Sutekh.  The  animal  of  Set  is  a  fabulous  one,  with 
possibly  a  traditional  reminiscence  of  the  giraffe.  It  is  still  uncertain  what  is  meant 
by  the  equation  of  Set  with  the  giant  Antaios.  Sethe  has  proposed  entayye  as  the 
name  of  the  god  of  Antaiopolis,  and  von  Bissing  sees  in  Antaios  as  Set  the 
representative  of  earth-born  strength  and  barbarism. 

Ember,  Aaron. — Notes  on  the  Relation  of  Egyptian  and  Semitic.  A  con- 
tinuation of  a  previous  paper  on  "  Semito-Egyptian  Sound-changes,"  in  which  the 
author  "assumed  that  Egyptian  was  a  Semitic  language,  but  that,  owing  to 
numerous  and  extensive  phonetic  changes,  and  moreover  to  the  influence  of  African 
non-Semitic  languages,  its  relation  to  the  other  Semitic  languages  has  to  a  great 
extent  become  obscured."  Both  in  this  and  in  the  previous  paper  the  author  points 
out  that  one  of  the  most  striking  of  the  sound-changes  is  the  change  of  the  Semitic 

R  and  L  to  ^^^  (Sem.  alepli).     In  many  words  the  Egyptian  ^^,   =  Sem.  R  has 

disappeared,  though  it  re-appears  in  Coptic.  The  Egyptian  name  of  the  hippo- 
potamus db  is  identical  with  the  Assyrian  dabii  "  pig."  This  identification  shows 
the  reason  why  the  Egyptians  called  the  hippopotamus-goddess  Rrt  "  Sow  "  [and 
also  why  the  animal  which  represents  Set  in  the  reliefs  at  Edfu  is  called  a  hippo- 
potamus in  the  inscriptions  and  represented  as  a  pig].  The  paper  concludes  with 
a  list  of  kindred  Semito-Egyptian  words :  e.g.,  Jm  "  herb,  plant,"  Assyr.  saminu 
"  plants  " ;  kku  "  darkness,"  Assyr.  kukku  "  darkness  "  ;  pkhr  "  to  surround,  go 
around,"  pMru  "troop  of  soldiers,"  Assyr.  pa^Mrii  "to  assemble," /«/^/;r«  "troop  of 
soldiers," pakkaru  "a  potter." 

Sethe,  K.—Nand.     i.  In  the    B»      '^     or    °^    ^     of  the  Pyramid  Texts, 

which  becomes    i  or    ^^  c^>  in  the  plural  and  with  suffixes,  we  find  the 

original  form  of  the  Coptic  toot-.     From  demotic  and  Coptic  it  appears  that  the 

absolute  form  is   ^    ,  rcope,  and  the  pronominal  form  ^°^  .     There  is,  however, 

this  difficulty :  how  did  the  c^:^  obtain  its  value  d  if  the  word  originally  began 

with  ^°^  .     It  might  be  argued  that  in  primitive  times  there  was  but  the  one  sign 

for  d  and  3,  in  the  same  way  that  there  was  but  one  sign,  '^■■^^^ ,  for  n  and  m,  and 
one,  «*-=- ,  for  k/i  and  s/i,  but  as  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  sign  c^^i  is  constantly 
used  with  the  value  d,  this  argument  falls  to  the  ground.     Dr.  Ember  has,  however, 

given  the  true  explanation.     There  is  in  Egyptian  a  word   \S  <==,  udy,  "to  lay, 

set,  throw";   this  is  written  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  and  Old  Kingdom  generally, 

with  a  few  fixed  exceptions,  without  the  ^,  therefore,  with  the  hand  only.     The 

I  3 


134  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aeg}>ptische  Sprache. 

verb  is  connected  with  the  Sem.j'aa',  "hand  "  (Babyl.  idu),  especially  with  the  idea 
"  to  lay,  to  give."  The  Egyptian  possessed,  like  the  Semitic,  a  word  for  "  hand," 
which  had  originally  the  consonants  yd.  From  this  word  the  picture  of  the  hand 
naturally  obtained  the  value  </ after  the  j  had  lost  its  consonantal  value.  The  loss 
or  change  of  the  consonantal  j/  can  be  paralleled  in  several  Egyptian  words.  This 
word  for  "  hand  "  was  lost  early  (as  was  the  case  with  other  words)  and  was  replaced 
by  the  above-mentioned  zrt;  but  a  denominative  verb  remained  c^,  "to  set,  to  give." 

From  this  is  derived  another  verb  (I .   "to  throw  down."     From         1 

comes,  by  metathesis,  <ir>  A  ,  "  to  give." 

2.  Erman,  Brugsch,  Max  Muller  and  Burchardt  are  of  opinion  that  c^>  is  not 
truly  d,  but  corresponds  to  the  Semitic  tO,  and  Meyer  says  that  "  die  dentale  Media 
dem  Aegyptischen  von  Anfang  an  fremd  gewesen  sei."  It  is  quite  true  that,  from 
the  New  Kingdom  on,  the  Egyptians  had  neither  d  nor  g.  But  this  was  not  the 
case  originally ;  it  is  certain  that  in  early  times,  Egyptian  possessed  both  d  and  g 
like  other  Semitic  languages.     The  change  appears  to  have  taken  place  between 

the  Old  Kingdom  and  the  Middle  Kingdom,  at  the  time  when  —  became    1 . 

Sethe,  K. — Hier  und  dort.    The  old  Egyptian  £^3 ,  and  the  new  Egyptian 

or     j_,,  are  used  with  the  meaning  "here  "  and  "there."     Spiegelberg  was  the 


first  to  recognise  the  Coptic  tai  "here,"  in  j_,.  The  Coptic  word  is  also  con- 
nected with  the  demonstrative  tai,  th,  "  this,  that " ;  but  as  in  Boheiric  the  T  in 
this  word   is  not  aspirated,    it  is  certainly  derived    from   an   original  c^=^.     The 

Boheiric  also  shows  that  the  i  in  tai  is  derived  not  from  (1 ,  but  from    *^  or  <:z=> ; 

for  according  to  the  laws  of  phonetics  the  short  vowel  a  of  Boheiric  becomes  h 

before  (1 ,  while  it  holds  its  position  before  ^^  or  <=>.     The  element  ^^  ,  with 

the  sounds  ai  and  h,  which  our  word  has  in  common  with  the  demonstrative 
pronouns,  represents  a  special  word  with  the  meaning  "here"  or  "there,"  when 

compounded   with   an   adverbial   sign  c^^.     The   earlier  word  i^   belongs 

exclusively  to  the  Middle  Kingdom  and  to  the  hieroglyphic  texts  of  the  XVIIIth 

dynasty.     Here  it  is  obvious  that  •>-=»  is  used  for    fl  ^^ ,  showing  that  the 

earlier  and  later  words  have  the  element  *^,  in  common  ;  and  it  is  equally  obvious 

that  both  words  contain  the  sign  for  a  hand  or  arm.  Like  every  other  language, 
Egyptian  uses  the  hand  or  arm  to  express  the  side  or  direction  \e.g.,  right-hand 
side]. 

Erman,  Adolf.     Die  aegyptisclien  Ausdriicke  fiir  "  tiock  nicht"  "  ehe."     The 
author  gives  a  summary  of  his  arguments  and  conclusions  at  the  end  of  his  paper. 

I.  The  pld  form  is  _a^  *^^v  >  "  while  he  had  not  yet  heard,  before  he  heard." 

This  form  can  be  used  absolutely.     2.  In  New  Egyptian,  the  later  negative     1  (2  is 
used ;  and  in  order  to  show  that  the  ci  is  to  be  sounded,  it  is  written      .     The 
particle  (1  S  often  precedes  the  negative.     3.  Even  in  New  Egyptian,  the  auxiliary 
is    used:   J  S  ^.,=^  ^^^  ^\  .     From    this    the   Coptic    unATqccoTU    is 

derived. 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  135 


Sethe,  Kurt. — Zum    Negativadjektiv.      The   negative  adjective  '^=», 

from  whicii  the  Coptic  at-  is  derived,  reads  (1  V\  —lU.  \  \\  ,  sometimes  written 
_JL,  (]  V  ll  ^  ■  Though  Erman  was  the  first  to  point  this  out,  he  has  since  changed 
and  now  transliterates  it  as  nnvt't.  This  is  due  to  a  misreading  of  the  Pyramid 
Texts,  where  in  the  sentence  'wvw^  M  V:>  ,  the  ^aa^  is  causal,  and  the  phrase 
should  read  " because  there  is  not."     The  two  neuter  expressions  and  ^^, 


"  that,  which,"  are  often  used  for  "  that  "  in  indirect  oration  ;        j . 


-v^w^  |\  AAw^,  "  thou  hast  said  in  this  thy  letter  that  thou  hast  brought."  But 
in  a  negative  sentence  [J  ^  is  used  instead  of  ntt  or  wnt. 

Gardiner,  Alan  H. — A  late  Egyptian  use  of  the  older  absolute  pronouns. 
Like  the  late  absolute  pronoun  (I  ^  ^  ,  and  the  rest,  the  early  absolute  pro- 
nouns can  be  used  in  a  possessive  sense.  This  occurs  only  in  late  Egyptian,  when 
they   are   spelt    \  (I        and    ^      ;  though  when  used  in  the  ordinary  way  they 

keep   the   earlier   spelling        and  1(2.     This   points  to  a  probable  difference  in 

pronunciation.     These  pronouns  are  used  :  (i)  After  a  substantive,  when  for  some 
special  reason  neither  the  simple  substantive  nor  the  possessive  adjective  can  be 

..a«.  employed.     E,..  ^  Z^^,^^^'^^^^^-^  -^l\ 

"  whenever  he  appears  in  any  festival  0^/;/.?."     (2)  As  predicate.     In  this  case  the 
subject  follows  and  may  be  either  a  suffix  or  a  substantive.     E.g.,  ^37  q  L=Z1  p' 

^^^■^  ^    i\ ,  "  Lord  of  valour,  to  him  belongs  victory." 


BURCHARDT,  MAX. — Das  Hers  des  Bata.  The  idea  of  a  heart  outside  the 
body  is  known  in  Scandinavian  "  marchen,"  where  the  giant's  heart  is  inside  an  egg, 
which  is  inside  a  duck,  which  floats  on  a  deep  well  in  an  inaccessible  church. 
Should  the  duck  be  caught,  it  would  let  the  egg  fall  into  the  fathomless  depths. 
This  was  in  order  that  no  one  should  obtain  possession  of  the  heart,  and  thereby 
destroy  the  giant.  In  the  case  of  Bata  the  heart  is  not  only  laid  in  the  flower  of 
a  cedar-tree,  but  is  disguised  as  a  bunch  of  grapes.  When  the  tree  is  cut  down  at 
the  instigation  of  his  faithless  wife,  Bata  dies  on  the  spot.  A  parallel  for  his 
resurrection  is  found  in  a  Hottentot  "  marchen."  In  this  story,  a  maiden  is  killed 
and  eaten  by  a  lion  ;  the  girl's  relatives  succeed  in  killing  the  lion,  and,  taking  her 
heart  out  of  the  lion's  body  they  place  it  in  a  calabash  and  pour  milk  over  it,  when 
the  girl  comes  to  life  again.  In  the  same  way  Bata  is  brought  to  life  by  placing 
his  heart  in  a  cup  and  pouring  water  over  it. 


Miscellaneous. 

I.  Spiegelberg,  W. — Note  on  a  tombstone  of  a  military  commander  Antef, 
who  accompanied  an  ancestor  of  the  Xlth  dynasty  on  a  campaign. 

I  4 


136  Zeitschrift  fur  Aegyptische  Sprache. 

2.  PlEPER,  M. — Daressy  has  discovered  a  table  of  offerings  with  the  name  and 

'■"'-  °^  k  P  °»  =  M  P  ^  =  f^  M  GEi 

(    s  ^tv.  ""^  1  •     Lepsius,   Sethe,   and  Steindorff  have   shown   that  it  was 

the  custom,  till  the  middle  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  to  have  the  same  name  for  the 
Horus  and  Nebtt  titles,  after  which,  the  custom  was  changed  and  never  came 
into  use  again.  Steindorff  even  states  that  there  is  no  exception  to  this  rule. 
That  a  king  should  change  his  name  during  his  reign  is  not  an  unheard  of  event, 
and  as  no  two  kings  ever  took  the  same  names  for  the  throne-  and  personal-names 
it  is  evident  that  this  offering-table  belongs  to  Amenemhat  I  of  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
and  not  to  the  Sehetepabra  of  the  Xlllth  dynasty. 

3.  BURCHARDT,  MAX. — In  the  trial  of  the  tomb  robbers,  two  tombs  are 
mentioned,  one  of  Seqenen-Ra  Ta-aa,  the  other  of  Seqenen-Ra  Ta-aa-aa,  whose 
tomb  is  expressly  said  to  be  on  the  north  of  King  Ta-aa.  There  are  in  fact  said  to 
be  three  kings  Seqenen-Ra,  who  are  distinguished  from  one  another  by  the  addition 
of  aa  and  qen  to  the  personal  name  Ta-aa  ;  but  except  for  the  notice  in  the  Abbott 
Papyrus  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  equating  these  kings.  There  would  appear 
to  have  been  two  graves  in  which  the  royal  name  Seqenen-Ra  Ta-aa  occurred ;  one 
being  that  of  the  king.  That  it  was  possible  to  mistake  the  tomb  of  a  noble  for 
that  of  a  king  owing  to  the  occurrence  of  the  royal  name,  is  seen  in  the  inscriptions 
of  the  scribes  who  visited  the  tomb  of  Khnumhotep  at  Beni  Hasan  "  in  order  to  see 
the  temple  of  King  Khufu."  As  also  there  is  no  known  example  of  two  kings 
having  the  same  throne-  and  personal-names,  the  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  there 
is  only  one  king  Seqenen-Ra,  not  three. 

4.  BURCHARDT,    MAX. — A    proper   name,    ^  ^ — ^  Mil 


published  by  Spiegelberg,  shows  the  name  of  the  god  Mithra  ;  the  second  part  of 
the  name  is  a  form  of  the  verb  Semu,  to  hear.  The  whole  name  therefore  means 
"  Mithra  has  heard." 

5.  BURCHARDT,  Max. — A  note  on  Egyptian  proper  names  in  Semitic  form. 
The  name  1"'Cn  is  translated  by  Spiegelberg  as  hapy-da.     But  a  single  "^  cannot  be 

equivalent  to  ,  therefore  the  author  proposes  as  a  translation  The  God  N.  comes; 
the  name  being  formed  on  the  model  of  ^^  i)  U  -^    ^"^  ^^  V?l  )1     ^* 

6.  Moller,  G. — In  ancient  times  the  ordinals  as  well  as  the  numerals  used  in 
dates  are  written  horizontally,  thus  C  E,  whereas  the  ordinary  numerals  are  written 
vertically.  It  is  possible  now  to  prove  that  the  date-numerals  are  ordinals,  from 
the  exaniple  in  the  Lamentations  of  Isis  and  Nephthys. 

7.  Newberry,  P.  E. — King  f  0  •^3:7  L)  ],  mentioned  in  11.  71,  72,  of  the 
Eloquent  Peasant,  is  usually  considered  to  be  otherwise  unknown.  But  this  is 
doubtless  M  ("^y^=("  M  ^  \\  y'lj  ]  the  Herakleopolitan 
king,  whose  name  occurs  on  a  weight  found  by  Prof  Petrie  at  Tell  Retabeh. 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  1 37 

8.  Newberry,  P.  E. — The  nome  ??"  "tk  ,  which  occurs  in  the  inscription  of 
Methen  is  not  in  the  Fayum,  but  is  the  same  as  the  fllni*  of  the  Eastern  Delta. 

fjjQ  is  a  rare  wor^  for  a  crocodile  occurring  in  New  Egyptian.  The  capital  of 
this  nome  was  Tham  at  the  end  of  the  Wady  Tumilat,  and  near  Lake  Timsah,  the 
lake  of  crocodiles. 

9.  Spiegelberg,  W. — Sethe's  new  reading  of  the  word  for  the  king  of  Upper 
Egypt,  1  ni'-swt,  explains  a  proper  name  which  occurs  on  a  funerary  papyrus  at 
Turin  (Catal.  No.  1854).     This  name  is  written  either  1  |^  or    ^\\\\       ilt]^- 

It  would  seem  that  the  variant  is  an  attempt  to  give  the  vocalisation  of  the  words. 
When  compared  with  the  Babylonian  equivalent  of  the  Royal  t\t\&  in-si-ib-ya,  the 
close  connection  of  the  two  is  very  clear,  with  the  exception  of  the  interchange  ol 
u  for  M. 

10.  Spiegelberg,  W. — Burchardt,  in  the  last  number  of  the  Zeitschrift,  has 
suggested  that  a  word  ksrhih  in  the  Demotic  Chronicle  stands  for  the  name  Xerxes. 
This  cannot  be  the  case  because  the  word  is  not  in  a  cartouche,  and  the  Demotic 
Chronicle  invariably  puts  royal  names  in  a  cartouche.  The  first  part  of  the  word 
also  is  destroyed,  and  all  that  can  be  read  with  certainty  is  hike  =  ^yoei^  :  z\\z 
"Dust." 

M.  A.  M. 


(     138     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin.  April,  1914.  No.  69.  18  pp.,  26  figures. 
10  cents.     Boston. 

This  contains  another  of  Dr.  Reisner's  welcome  reports.  At  the  Third 
Cataract  he  excavated  a  frontier  post  of  the  Egyptians,  dating  from  the  Vlth 
dynasty  to  the  Hyksos  Age.  A  great  brick  fort  and  houses  around  it  produced  but 
little  result ;  but  the  tombs  of  the  Hyksos  Age  were  rich  and  well  preserved.  They 
are  distinguished  by  the  pottery,  which  is  of  the  very  thin  brilliant  red  and  black 
ware,  like  that  found  in  a  grave  of  the  XVIIth  dynasty  at  Thebes  {Qiirnchy 
PI.  XXVIII).  Rams'  heads  are  buried  in  the  graves,  recalling  the  animal  heads  in 
the  Pan-graves  {Diospolis,  PI.  XXXIX).  Each  great  man  lay  on  a  bed  which  had 
carved  bulls'  legs,  and  with  many  slave  burials  in  contracted  position,  around  him 
in  a  circular  pit.  The  people  were  broad  headed  and  straight  haired  :  they  belong 
to  some  unrecorded  invaders.  The  most  interesting  objects  found  are  the  bone  and 
ivory  inlays  in  the  form  of  animals,  and  the  similar  figures  of  mica  which  were 
sewn  on  the  dresses.  The  other  objects  accord  with  what  was  used  in  Egypt  at 
the  time. 

Studies  in  Palaeopatliology  in  Egypt. — By  Dr.  M.  A.  RUFFER.  14  pp.,  6  plates, 
(Journal  of  Patliology,  191 3.) 

This  paper  describes  the  state  of  Coptic  mummies  from  Antinoe.  The  teeth 
were  remarkably  bad,  as  are  those  of  Roman  mummies  from  Saqqareh,  and  the 
modern  Alexandrian.  Pyorrhoea  was  common,  and  large  abscesses.  Local  out- 
growth on  the  spine  and  other  bones  was  frequent,  and  in  the  nose  it  sometimes 
choked  the  passage.  Altogether  the  later  period  seems  to  have  been  more 
unhealthy  than  the  earlier  ages. 

L'Agypte  Monumentale  et  Pittoresque. — Par  Camille  Lagier.  8vo,  240  pp.^ 
48  plates.     19 14.     (Vromant,  Bruxelles.) 

In  this  popular  volume  Pfere  Lagier  gives  the  travelling  impressions  of  a  scholar 
who  already  knew  the  meaning  of  all  he  saw,  and  he  has  made  a  pleasant  outline  of 
general  interest  for  the  French  public.  It  is  well  illustrated  with  48  excellent  blocks 
of  Dr.  Capart's  series,  which  are  boldly  printed  on  both  sides  of  faced  paper,  with 
but  little  loss  of  quality.  We  can  only  regret  that  the  author  misrepresents  all  the 
Protestant  Copts  as  being  moved  solely  by  the  "  dollar  " ;  any  knowledge  of  them 
would  have  shown  that  education  was  the  cause  of  their  religious  attitude,  which  is 
of  no  possible  benefit  to  their  position. 


i 


Reviews.  1 39 

Les  Ecritures  Egyptiennes  et  FAntiquitc  Classiqiie.  Par  P.  MaresTaing.  8vo, 
143  pp.     7  frs.  50.     191 3.     (Geuthner,  Paris.) 

This  is  a  collection  of  the  references  to  Egyptian  writing  by  the  classical 
authors.  The  interest  of  the  study  lies  in  showing  the  extent  to  which  the  writing 
was  understood .^n  late  times;  but  in  no  case  does  it  aid  in  modern  study  of 
Egyptian. 

Etude  critique  sur  un  Acte  de   Vente  Immobiliere. — H.  Sottas.     8vo,  21  pp. 

2  plates.     2  frs.     191 3.     (Geuthner,  Paris.) 

This  is  a  discussion  of  the  well-known  deed  of  sale  of  a  house  found  at  Gizeh. 
The  question  is  of  the  order  of  the  columns,  without  greatly  affecting  the  sense. 
This  document  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  and  the  decrees  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  show 
how  gradual  was  the  rise  of  fixed  rules  after  the  early  period  of  confused  writing, 
as  on  the  panels  of  Hesy. 

The  Nubian  Texts  of  the  Christian  Period. — By  F.  Ll.  GRIFFITH.    4to,  134  pp., 

3  plates.     1913.     Berlin.     {Abhandl.  Konigl.  Preuss.  A^ad.) 

This  is  a  great  work  restoring  to  our  knowledge  the  earlier  form  of  the  Nubian 
language,  from  documents  dating  between  the  eighth  and  eleventh  centuries  A.D. 
Mr.  Griffith  gives  the  complete  texts  of  the  five  long  documents,  and  many 
fragments  that  are  known,  with  full  translations,  and  grammar,  and  a  vocabulary, 
so  far  as  the  materials  permit.  The  interest  is  almost  entirely  philological  at 
present,  as  the  documents  are -much  like  the  usual  mediaeval  Coptic  literature.  It 
is  pleasant  to  observe  the  acknowledgments  of  Dr.  Schafer's  previous  work,  much 
of  which,  yet  unpublished,  he  magnanimously  supplied  to  the  author  with  his 
well-known  courtesy. 

Catalogue  des  Antiquites  Egyptiennes  recueillies  dans  les  fonilles  de  Koptos  en 
1910  et  191 1. — Par  Adolphe  Reinach,  191 3.  (Musee  Guimet  de  Lyon,  3  fr.  50.) 
i8mo,  132  pp.,  37  figures. 

This  is  a  useful  list  of  the  antiquities  of  all  periods  from  Koptos,  now  preserved 
at  Lyons ;  it  does  not  include  the  early  decrees  and  other  monuments  kept  at 
Cairo,  nor  others  now  in  the  Louvre.  The  most  unusual  objects  are  the  Palmyrene 
steles  found  together  in  one  house. 

Egyptologie  et  Histoire  des  Religions. — Par  Adolphe  Reinach  {Revue  de 
Synthese  Historiques,  XXVII,  i,  2),  1913.     8vo,  56  pp. 

This  is  a  detailed  review  of  Prof.  Foucart's  recent  book  on  the  comparative 
method  in  the  study  of  religion.  We  cannot  venture  to  give  here  an  abstract 
of  a  diffuse  volume  of  450  pages,  commented  on  by  56  pages  of  review.  Broadly 
speaking,  M.  Foucart  regards  the  long  historical  development  of  religion  in  Egypt 
as  more  valuable  to  us  than  the  far  more  detailed  and  precise  knowledge  of 
religions  over  a  shorter  period,  or  in  modern  times.  He  would  rather  explain 
the  present  position  by  the  far  slighter  information  that  we  can  gather  over 
remote  ages.  In  this  he  attacks  the  position  of  Frazer  and  other  writers  of  the 
anthropological  school.  M.  Reinach,  while  recognising  various  lines  of  thought 
emphasised  in  the  work,  cannot  at  all  agree  with  the  general  position.  The  whole 
matter  is  treated,  on  both  sides,  as  a  debate  on  opinions  of  others,  instead  of  an 
argument  on  basic  facts  ;  it  cannot  be  discussed  profitably  without  rivalling  the 
length  of  the  works  in  question. 


I40  Reviews. 

Ancient  Egyptian  and  Greek  Looms. — By  H.  LiNG  ROTH.  41  pp.,  39  figures 
and  plates.     2s.  Sd.    (Bankfield  Museum,  Halifax.) 

This  is  the  first  detailed  study  of  Egyptian  looms,  and  a  treatment  of  the  facts 
by  a  specialist  was  much  needed.  Every  example  of  drawing  has  been  utilised ; 
and  in  some  instances  four  or  five  different  copies  have  been  compared,  and  are 
republished  here,  from  the  best  modern  sources.  The  main  conclusions  are  that 
the  horizontal  loom  on  the  ground  is  the  earlier  in  Egypt,  the  vertical  loom  not 
coming  in  till  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  although  it  is  the  only  loom  in  Greece  and 
some  other  countries.  A  point  still  to  be  cleared  up  is  the  title  of  the  overseer  of 
the  weaving  at  Beni  Hasan.     It  is  rendered  by  Prof.  Newberry  "  Superintendent  of 

canals  "  {B.H.,  I,  p.  48).     This  seems  very  unlikely  ;  and  the  sign  looks  as  if 

it  might  be  the  loom  with  two  end  beams  and  threads  between,  the  lines  being 
straight  in  Wilkinson's  copy.  If  so,  it  might  read  "  Overseer  of  the  loom  ground," 
in  accordance  with  the  scene  ;  and  then  the  determinative  of  land  would  be  very 
appropriate  for  the  space  covered  by  the  flat  looms.  Various  pieces  of  looms  in 
museums  are  also  illustrated  here  and  discussed. 

The  Decay  and  Preservation  of  Antiquities. — By  Prof.  Dr.  F.  Rathgen. 
16  pp.,  8  plates,     IS.     (The  Museums  Journal,  Nov.,  1913.) 

Very  few  curators  understand  the  first  stage  of  their  business,  the  material 
care  of  the  objects  for  which  they  are  responsible.  The  most  ghastly  disasters 
stand  unblushingly  in  our  Museums :  objects  dropping  to  pieces,  fading,  and 
perishing.  The  commonest  wreckage  is  caused  by  placing  stones  which  contain 
salt  against  a  wall  with  cement.  The  whole  face  is  certain  to  perish,  and  yet  this 
is  done  in  museums  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  Dr.  Rathgen  here  gives  much 
valuable  advice,  gathered  in  his  museum  workshops  at  Berlin.  His  methods  are 
sound  from  a  chemical  and  mechanical  standpoint,  but  sometimes  rather  elaborate. 
Every  curator  should  understand  the  use  of  paraffin  wax  as  a  preservative  and 
strengthener ;  the  simplest  way  of  cleaning  bronzes,  by  placing  with  some  scrap 
zinc  (or  even  iron  nails)  in  vinegar  or  soda  solution  ;  and  the  extraction  of  salt  by 
soaking,  or,  better,  by  laying  a  stone  face  down  on  wet  sand  and  scraping  the  salt 
away  as  it  comes  out  on  the  back.  These  simple  ways  will  apply  to  the  majority 
of  cases.  The  latest  improvement  is  to  use  non-flam,  celluloid  solution  in 
place  of  the  old  oils  and  varnishes.  When  the  applications  of  chemistry  are  rightly 
made  the  first  necessity  in  the  training  of  a  curator,  fewer  regrettable  incidents 
will  occur  in  our  museums. 

Engineeriftg  of  Antiquity  and  technical  progress  in  arts  and  crafts. — By  G.  F. 
ZiMMER,  A.M.InstC.E.     8vo,  89  pp.     (Probsthain.) 

This  book  draws  its  illustration  mainly  from  Egyptian  sources.  With  the 
technical  knowledge  of  the  author,  such  a  work  might  have  been  made  of  the 
greatest  value,  but  unfortunately  his  knowledge  of  the  ancient  world  is  inadequate. 
The  first  chapter  is  on  the  antiquity  of  iron.  This  begins  with  Tubal-Cain, 
mythical  Chinese  records  of  2000  B.C.,  and  Homer,  quoted  as  authorities ;  and  the 
age  of  iron  in  Egypt  is  settled  by  Herodotos  saying  that  it  was  used  in  building 
the  pyramids.  Not  a  word  is  said  about  the  earliest  abundance  of  iron  tools  in 
Assyria,  or  the  various  instances  of  dated  iron  back  to  pre-historic  times  in  Egypt. 
For  the  age  of  tin  and  bronze,  there  is  nothing  quoted  later  than  Gardner 
Wilkinson,  nearly  eighty  years  ago.     For  tools,  Belzoni,  still  further  back,  is  the 


Reviews.  141 

only  definite  authority.  An  illustration  called  "  Egyptians  making  glass "  is 
repeated  four  times,  but  it  shows  the  blowing  of  a  furnace,  and  has  nothing 
to  do  with  glass.  The  devices  for  lifting  stones  are  taken  from  Choisy,  and  are 
hopelessly  futile,  and  without  any  evidence.  Pottery  is  stated  to  have  been  "  in  use 
prior  to  the  arrival  of  Joseph  in  Egypt."  The  author  seems  never  to  have  heard 
of  the  long  series  of  pre-historic  pottery.  It  is  truly  unfortunate  that  such  a  book 
should  be  issued  in  the  present  day  without  any  knowledge  of  the  mass  of 
information  that  has  been  acquired  in  the  last  fifty  years. 

Beitrdge  zur  Kenntnis  des  Gewerbes  ini  hellenistischen  Aegypten. — Doctorial 
thesis  of  Theodor  Reil.     191 3.     211  pp. 

This  valuable  work  is  a  handbook  to  the  whole  of  the  industrial  details  of  the 
Greek  papyri  from  Egypt.  The  first  section  is  on  the  relation  of  industries  to  the 
State  (by  Monopolies,  Taxes,  and  Customs),  to  the  Temples,  and  to  private 
enterprise.  It  would  have  been  well  to  look  a  little  beyond  papyri,  and  to  include 
such  stone  documents  as  the  Red  Sea  customs  \.2.x\^  {Koptos,  27)  and  the  Diocletian 
edict  of  prices,  which  are  all-important  for  the  subject. 

The  bulk  of  the  work  is  a  compilation  of  all  references  to  each  trade  in  order, 
and  a  tabular  statement  of  all  prices  recorded  in  each  kind  of  work : — Masons, 
builders,  brickmakers,  potters,  glassworkers,  jewellers,  smiths,  plumbers,  carpenters, 
weavers,  dyers,  fullers,  embroiderers,  and  tailors.  The  social  condition  of  the 
trades  is  then  discussed.  Further  are  papyrus-workers,  oil  and  salt  duties,  millers, 
bakers,  butchers,  fishmongers  and  brewers.  Then  comes  the  study  of  women 
workers  and  slave  labour,  and  the  labour  unions  in  different  ages.  The  writer  is  so 
saturated  with  his  subject  that  he  has  forgotten  to  give  a  list  of  his  many 
abbreviations ;  and  even  in  a  table  of  references  to  his  various  sources,  he  only 
gives  them  in  the  same  form  of  initials.  On  referring  to  the  brickmaking,  the  prices 
given  do  not  include  those  published  by  Prof  Mahaffy,  of  15  and  16  drachmas 
per  myriad  (Petr.,  II,  pp.  48,  51).  The  price  of  bricks  is  an  excellent  economic 
standard,  as  the  material  of  Nile  mud  and  sand  is  fairly  constant,  and  there  are  no 
complications  of  trade.  The  early  Ptolemaic  drachma  might  be  worth  6d.,  so  the 
lowest  price,  10  drachmas  =  5^. ;  later  on  a  triens  =  43-.,  is  the  price  of  a  myriad 
bricks.  At  the  present  day  about  8j.  is  the  lowest  price.  Thus  we  may  say  that 
gold  and  silver  were  in  classical  times  worth  the  double  of  what  they  are  now. 
A  higher  rate  might  have  been  expected,  looking  at  the  economic  mining  with 
modern  machinery.  This  book  covers  untouched  ground,  and  will  be  an  invaluable 
guide  for  all  studies  on  ancient  economics  and  prices. 

The  Miraculous  Birth  of  King  Anion- hotep  III,  and  other  Egyptian  Studies. — 
By  Colin  Campbell,  D.D.     Svo,  204  pp.,  57  figures.     1912.     (Oliver  and  Boyd.) 

Dr.  Colin  Campbell  has  taken  up  the  useful  function  of  expounding  the 
monuments,  a  matter  too  often  neglected  by  scholars  who  are  only  thinking  of  their 
own  standpoint.  The  main  subject  begins  with  the  belief  in  the  divine  descent  of 
the  kings  ;  first  the  Horus  descent,  shown  by  the  falcon  ;  next  the  Ra  ancestry  of 
the  Vth  dynasty  ;  then  the  Amen  ancestry  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  which  was 
also  compatible  with  the  kings  being  called  child  of  Aah,  of  Tahuti,  and  of  Ra. 
The  scenes  of  the  birth  of  Amenhotep  III,  in  the  temple  of  Luqsor,  are  described 
in  detail,  throughout  the  fourteen  subjects,  nearly  all  of  which  are  shown  in 
photographs.  The  same  subject  of  divine  birth  occurred  also  in  parts  of  the 
Ramesseum,  now  destroyed.     There  is  next  a  description  of  the  eight  scenes  of 


142  Reviews. 

coronation  of  Amenhotep  III  ;  and  a  description  of  the  adoration  of  Mut.  The 
Osirification  of  the  l<ing  at  the  sed  festival  is  closely  on  the  lines  already  stated  in 
Researches  in  Sinai,  and  in  Qumeh. 

It  has  long  been  a  reproach  that  the  most  interesting  series  of  processional 
sculptures  on  the  wall  of  the  colonnade  at  Luqsor  have  not  been  published  or 
photographed.  In  this  book  there  is  a  full  account  of  the  scenes,  but  unfortunately 
the  photographs  are  too  small  to  examine  the  figures,  in  most  parts.  The  subject 
of  a  great  procession  of  the  god  Amen  from  Karnak  to  Luqsor,  seems  to  have  been 
on  the  occasion  of  the  great  re-instatement  of  Amen  by  Tut-onkh-amen,  though 
the  work  was  later  appropriated  by  Haremheb.  It  is  full  of  interesting  detail  of 
a  great  religious  festival  and  its  collateral  exhibitions,  and  it  is  greatly  to  be  hoped 
that  it  will  be  all  fully  photographed  on  a  large  scale. 

The  tomb  of  Sen-nezem  is  described  with  fourteen  views  showing  many 
interesting  mythological  figures.  A  curious  oversight  of  the  tomb  painter  was 
drawing  a  double  door  with  the  two  hinges  in  the  middle  !  Lastly,  the  tomb  of 
Pashedu  is  described  with  three  views. 


(     143     ) 


NOTES    AND   NEWS. 


The  interesting  building  which  Prof.  Naville  has  uncovered,  and  described  in 
a  paper  here,  is  in  several  respects  still  an  enigma.  The  exterior  of  it  is  yet  quite 
unknown  ;  the  collateral  buildings  around  it  have  yet  to  be  disclosed,  and  their 
connection  with  it  to  be  studied  ;  the  original  entrance  to  it  has  to  be  found, — all  of 
these  further  discoveries  are  needful  to  understanding  the  meaning  of  the  large 
constructions  now  brought  to  light.  The  more  pressing  question  is  that  of  the 
depth  and  nature  of  the  deep  space  around  the  central  block  of  the  hall.  That  this 
now  reaches  water  at  14  feet  below  the  floor,  shows  that  originally  the  floor  of  the 
hall  was  at  least  30  feet,  or  35  feet,  above  water.  That  the  water  level  has  risen  at 
Abydos,  as  in  the  rest  of  Egypt,  is  proved  by  the  1st  dj^nasty  temple  being  at  the 
lowest  known  water  level  now.  As  it  must  have  been  dry  originally,  the  watei 
level  must  have  risen  at  least  the  whole  height  of  the  present  inundation  changes. 
To  know  the  depth  of  the  space  is  therefore  essential  to  understanding  whether  the 
building  originally  had  water  in  it,  or  was  dry. 

The  projecting  ledge  around  the  walls  and  the  central  block  is  well  seen  in  the 
lower  photograph.  It  appears  cut  square;  and,  if  so  . originally  (though  now 
rounded  in  parts),  we  can  hardly  but  see  in  this  the  sides  of  a  floor  that  was  once 
continuous,  and  has  been  extracted  by  the  stone  hunters.  Or  it  may  be  that  the 
building  was  never  completed  in  this  part.  The  stairways  appear  as  if  intended  to 
reach  a  lower  construction  ;  they  certainly  never  reached  water  as  they  now  are. 
At  their  lower  ends,  opening  into  the  deep  trench,  it  may  be  that  they  continued  in 
a  structure  of  fine  limestone  which  filled  the  trench  with  subterranean  passages.  It, 
is  evident  that  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  uncovered  before  we  can  see  the  meaning 
of  this  curious  cyclopean  building.  We  hope  all  those  who  have  so  successfully 
carried  out  this  year's  work  will  continue  the  future  clearance  of  this  site  completely. 

Prof  Steindorff"  has  had  a  successful  season  at  Anibeh  in  Nubia.  He  has 
opened  a  cemetery  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  with  burials  of  Reisner's  C  group  type. 
About  250  graves  have  been  cleared,  and  much  fine  pottery  was  found.  A  fort 
of  this  age  protected  the  settlement.  There  was  also  a  town  of  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty,  with  a  temple.  We  hope  in  our  next  number  to  give  a  full  account  from 
the  excavator. 

Lord  Carnarvon's  work  at  Thebes  has — amongst  other  matters — been  turned 
to  the  site  of  the  tomb  of  Amenhotep  I.  The  attribution  of  this  large  subterranean 
work  is  certain,  as  the  vases  with  the  king's  name  have  been  found  in  the  passage 
by  Mr.  Carter. 

At  Antinoe,  Mr.  Johnson  has  succeeded  in  rescuing  some  more  papyri,  including 
the  leaves  of  Theocritus  lately  described  in  the  Times. 


(     144    ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 


The  series  of  seated  figures  of  Senusert  I  is  one  of  the  most  striking  parts  of  the 
Cairo  Museum.  The  highly  finished  work,  and  the  perfect  condition  of  these  ten 
lifesize  figures,  fixes  them  in  the  memory.  They  were  prepared  for  the  ofiering 
court  of  the  king's  pyramid  at  Lisht ;  taken  there,  they  were  laid  carefully  on  their 
sides  awaiting  the  completion  of  the  building.  The  king  died  too  soon, 
Amenemhat  II  had  other  cares,  and  did  not  complete  the  temple  of  his  father  ; 
thus  the  statues  were  left,  perfect  and  unused,  until  uncovered  twenty  years  ago. 
At  first  sight  a  visitor  sees  such  differences  of  expression  that  the  accuracy  of  the 
portraiture  might  be  questioned  ;  but  if  the  fixed  points,  such  as  the  profile,  are 
carefully  noted  it  will  be  seen  that  the  ten  statues  are  identical.  All  that  varies  in 
them  is  the  natural  fluctuation  of  a  vigorous  face  in  different  moods,  and  it  must  be 
remembered  that  they  have  not  received  the  inspiring  touches  of  the  artist's  finish, 
they  are  but  drafted  out  and  not  yet  vitalised.  The  close  resemblance  to  the 
portraits  of  Senusert  elsewhere,  such  as  at  Abydos  or  Koptos,  in  contrast  with  the 
difference  from  other  kings  of  this  age,  shows  how  really  individual  is  the 
portraiture. 

The  second  portrait  is  the  head  of  Senusert  II   found  in  the   great   pit   of 

Karnak,  broken  from  a  statue  of  his  in  red 
granite.  Unfortunately,  the  profile  is  not 
published,  but  the  resemblance  of  type  to 
that  of  the  adjoining  profile  head  from  the 
temple  of  Lahun  confirms  the  accuracy  of 
both.  Every  statue  should  be  published  in 
at  least  three  views,  full  face,  profile  in  the 
plane  of  the  lips,  and  a  three-quarter  view  to 
show  the  facial  curves.  The  double  uraeus 
on  the  head  should  be  noted ;  at  this  period 
a  double  function  of  the  king  was  prominent, 
there  are  the  shrines  with  two  statues  of 
Amenemhat  III,  and  otiier  instances,  probably 
referring  to  the  Southern  and  Northern 
dominion.  The  adjoining  head,  shown  of 
full  size  here,  is  the  only  perfect  profile  from 
the  king's  pyramid  temple.  A  head,  larger, 
but  with  the  nose  injured,  was  found  by  me 
in  1889;  it  passed  to  Mr.  Kennard's  share 
of  that  excavation,  and  was  sold  at  his  sale 
on  July  16,  191 2. 


iSenusert  II.     Temple  of  Lahun. 


H' 


^ 


SENUSERT    I,     LIMESTONE     STATUE,    LISHT,    CAIRO    MUSEUM. 


V 


SENUSERT    II,    RED    GRANITE    HEAD,    KARNAK,    CAIRO    MUSEUM. 


,^v 


KARANOG  51.        8468. 


AREIKA   26  2. 


KARANOG   51.         8477. 


KARANOG   46.         G    100.         8176. 


F 


AREIKA  25.7. 


KARANOG  81.        G  253.        8492. 


NUBIAN     BISCUIT-WARE. 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


THE    BISCUIT    OR    EGG-SHELL   WARE    OF   THE    SUDAN 

AND    CHINA. 

{Frontispiece.) 

Some  of  the  most  beautiful  pottery  ever  made  is  that  to  which  I  have  given  the 
name  of  "  biscuit-ware  "  and  which  was  manufactured  in  the  Sudan.  Dr.  Maclver's 
excavations  in  Nubia  first  made  us  acquainted  with  it ;  since  then  I  have  found 
fragments  of  it  on  various  Meroitic  sites  in  the  Sudan — such  as  Kerma,  and  Kawa — 
and  large  quantities  of  it  have  been  discovered  by  Prof.  Garstang  at  Meroe.  We 
now  know  that  it  is  to  Meroe  that  we  must  ascribe  its  origin.  The  kaolinic  clay 
of  which  it  is  composed  is  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  locality ;  the  clay 
was  first  noticed  by  Major  Rhodes  and  myself  at  Umm  Ali,  ten  miles  north  of 
Meroe,  from  which  most  of  the  building  stone  of  Meroe  was  brought. 

The  ware  is  very  fine,  hard,  and  thin  ;  but  it  is  not  translucent,  nor  is  it  so 
resonant  as  Chinese  porcelain.  Otherwise  it  closely  resembles  the  biscuit  and 
"  eggshell  "  china  of  the  Far  East.  The  paste  is  usually  white,  sometimes  creamy, 
and  is  often  covered  with  a  thin  red  wash.  A  large  proportion  of  the  ware  is 
painted  in  different  colours.  The  designs  are  usually  realistic,  representing  flowers, 
ivy  or  vine  leaves,  birds,  and  the  like.  But  besides  the  polychrome  pottery,  there 
is  also  a  good  deal  of  stamped  pottery,  lotus-flowers,  the  Egyptian  symbol  of  life, 
rosettes  and  similar  designs  being  impressed  upon  the  clay.  The  painted  designs 
can  be  traced  back  to  the  Greek  pottery  of  Naukratis  ;  the  stamped  pottery  seems 
to  have  been  imitated  from  Aretino  ware.  The  specimens  found  in  Nubia  are 
naturally  provincial  and  much  inferior  to  the  pottery  of  the  capital ;  the  clay  is 
comparatively  poor,  and  the  decoration  betrays  the  hand  of  the  imitator. 

The  period  during  which  the  ware  was  manufactured  at  Meroe  extends  from 
the  third  or  second  century  B.C.  to  the  third  century  A.D.,  and  its  northern  h"mit  is 
that  of  Sudanese  influence  in  Nubia.  In  fact,  it  is  not  met  with  even  in  Northern 
Nubia,  so  that  its  northern  limit  may  be  described  as  the  southern  boundary  of  the 
Roman  Empire. 

The  origin  of  the  ware  has,  I  believe,  been  discovered  by  Prof.  Garstang.  He 
has  found  fragments  of  vases  and  bowls  similar  to  those  afterwards  made  in  the 
biscuit-ware,  but  consisting  of  ostrich  egg-shell.  Many  of  these  fragments  are 
painted  in  patterns  which  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  polychrome  biscuit-ware, 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  is  right  in  thinking  that  the  egg-shell  vessels 
were  the  primitive  models  afterwards  imitated  in  clay.  The  Meroite  potter 
discovered  that  the  kaolinic  clay  occurring  in  his  neighbourhood  enabled  him  to 
reproduce  the  cups  and  bowls  of  egg-shell  which  had  been  previously  in  use. 

K 


146  The  Biscuit  or  Egg-shell  Ware  of  the  Sudan  and  China. 

Now  there  is  only  one  other  part  of  the  world  in  which  similar  ware  is  found. 
This  is  China,  the  egg-shell  porcelain  which  is  now  made  in  Japan  being  a  modern 
imitation  of  the  Chinese.  Like  the  Sudanese,  the  Chinese  potter  had  at  his  disposal 
an  abundance  of  kaolinic  clay.  But  that  he  was  never  led  indejDcndently  to  take 
advantage  of  this  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  all  the  pottery  found  in  the  early  graves 
of  China  is  thick  and  somewhat  coarse.  It  was  imitated,  not  from  egg-shell,  but 
from  metal  and  lacquered  wood. 

Nevertheless,  a  period  comes  when  "  biscuit  "  or  "  egg-shell  "  china  suddenly 
makes  its  appearance  among  the  Chinese.  Thus  far  nothing  of  the  sort  has  been 
discovered  with  certainty  in  graves  which  are  older  than  the  T'ang  period 
(.\.D.  618-906),  though  I  have  seen  a  specimen  which  was  said  to  have  come  from 
a  grave  of  the  Sui  period  (a.d.  581).  The  literary  evidence,  however,  tends  to  show 
that  "  egg-shell  "  china  must  have  originated  in  the  period  between  the  close  of  the 
later  Han  (A.D.  265)  and  the  rise  of  the  T'ang,  though  until  the  early  cemeteries  of 
China  are  scientifically  excavated,  the  exact  date  of  its  first  appearance  cannot  be 
accurately  fixed. 

Dr.  Bushell  tells  us  that  "  there  are  abundant  references  to  porcelain  in  the 
voluminous  literature  of  the  T'ang  dynasty  "  and  that  "  the  poets  of  the  time  liken 
their  wine-cups  to  '  disks  of  thinnest  ice.' "  The  Arab  traveller  Suliman  in  the 
ninth  century  (A.D.  851)  describes  the  vases  he  had  seen  in  China  which  were  "  as 
transparent  as  glass;  water  is  seen  through  them  "  ;^  and  similarly  thin,  semi-lucent 
ware  was  actually  imitated  at  Cairo  in  fayence  some  two  centuries  later.-  At 
a  later  date  (a.d.  955)  the  Chinese  emperor  issued  a  rescript  ordering  porcelain  to 
be  made  "  as  thin  as  paper."  This  T'ang  ware  must  have  had  an  ancestry  of  some 
length. 

It  is  a  far  cry  from  China  to  the  Sudan,  but  during  the  past  winter  the  distance 
has  been  unexpectedly  bridged  over.  Among  the  documents  brought  back  from 
Western  China  by  the  Pelliot  expedition  are  some  belonging  to  the  Anterior  Han 
dynasty  (206  B.C.-A.D.  24)  describing  trading  voyages  to  the  West.  The  voyagers 
made  their  way  to  the  coasts  of  Huang-chi  or  the  Kingdom  of  Axum,  and  the 
journey  occupied  from  ten  to  twelve  months,  as  various  ports  were  visited  on  the 
way.  Between  A.D.  i  and  6  a  special  embassy  was  sent  by  the  Chinese  emperor  to 
the  king  of  Axum  with  gifts  and  merchandise,  and  a  request  for  the  horn  of 
a  unicorn,  which  was  duly  despatched  in  the  shape  of  a  horn  of  the  African 
rhinoceros.^  Among  the  articles  of  commerce  carried  by  the  Chinese  to  South- 
western Asia  and  the  African  coast,  as  we  learn  from  Chau  Ju-Kua,*  were  pottery, 
and,  at  a  later  date,  porcelain,  and  what  the  merchants  and  sailors  were  able  to 
carry  with  them  on  the  outward  voyage  could  just  as  easily  have  been  carried  back 
to  China  on  the  homeward  voyage. 

The  "  biscuit-ware  "  of  Meroe  could  thus  have  readily  come  to  their  knowledge. 
It  would  have  been  carried  along  the  trade  routes  which  passed  from  Meroe  to  the 
harbours  of  the  Red  Sea  coast,  and  there  it  would  have  become  known  to  the 

'  "  Ilaont  une  terre  excellentc  dont  lis  font  des  vases  d'une  delicalesse  aussi  grande  que  s'ils 
estoient  de  verre,  at  qui  sont  egalement  transparents  "  (Renaudot's  translation,  p.  26). 

'  Nassiri  Khosrau,  writing  in  December,  1048,  says  (Schafer's  translation,  p.  151):  "On 
fabrique  K  Misr  de  la  faience  de  toute  esp^ce  ;  elle  est  si  fine  et  si  diaphane  que  Ton  voit  k  travers 
les  parois  d'un  vase  la  main  appliqu6e  i  I'ext^rieur.  On  fait  des  bols,  des  tasses,  des  assiettes  et 
autres  utensils.  On  les  decore  avec  des  couleurs  qui  sont  analogues  Ji  celle  de  I'etoffe  appelee 
bouqualemoun  ('shot  silk  ');  les  nuances  changent  selon  la  position  que  Ton  donne  au  vase." 

'  A.  Herrmann:  Zeiischrift  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fiir  Erdkunde^  igJS- 

*  Fr.  Hirth  and  W.  W.  Rockhill,  St.  Petersburg,  1912. 


The  Biscuit  or  Egg-shell   Wa?-e  of  the  Sudan  and  China.  147 

Chinese.  The  Chinese  were  already  making  the  fine  glazed  pottery  of  the  Han 
period,  and  using  it  in  preference  to  the  lacquer  and  metal  vessels  of  an  earlier  date, 
and  their  potters  would  have  recognised  that  they  also  possessed  at  home  the  same 
kaolinic  clay  as  the  potters  of  the  Sudan.  As  they  imitated  the  glazes  and  designs 
of  the  Hellenfaed  cities  of  Central  Asia  with  which  they  had  become  acquainted  in 
the  second  century  B.C.,  and  as  a  few  centuries  later  they  imitated  the  glass  and 
cloisonne  of  Byzantium,  so,  too,  we  may  feel  sure,  they  would  have  attempted  to 
imitate  the  beautiful  foreign  ware  which  was  brought  from  Africa.  A  bowl 
I  obtained  from  a  T'ang  tomb  is  decorated  with  painted  reliefs  which  are  identical 
with  a  favourite  floral  design  on  the  Meroitic  ware  {e.g.,  Woolley  and  Maclver  : 
Karanog  IV,  Pll.  46,  G  lOO;  59,  G  546  ;  81,  G  253  ;  84,  G  621),  and  among  the 
terra-cotta  figurines  in  my  possession  from  tombs  of  the  pre-T'ang  period  are  some 
which  are  as  distinctively  Hellenic  in  character  as  the  figurines  discovered  by 
Prof  Petrie  at  Memphis.  It  is  true  that  in  the  latter  case  the  inspiration  came  from 
the  West  by  the  land-route  across  Central  Asia,  but  it  indicates  how  ready  the 
Chinese  were  at  the  time  to  adopt  and  assimilate  the  elements  of  Western  art. 
A  head-rest  from  a  T'ang  tomb  which  I  obtained  in  China  has  a  floral  pattern  in 
red  and  yellow  which  possesses  all  the  characteristics  of  the  naturalistic  designs  of 
the  Meroitic  ware. 

A.  H.  Sayce. 


K   2 


(     148     ) 


KING  UDY-MU  (DEN)  AND  THE  PALERMO  STONE. 

King  Udy-mu  has  long  been  known  to  the  world  under  several  different  names, 
and  it  will  be  well  to  recount  these  at  the  outset,  so  as  to  clear  up  any  confusion  in 
the  mind  of  the  reader.  At  the  time  of  the  1st  dynasty  the  Egyptian  kings  bore 
two  names,  each  of  which  was  preceded  by  one  or  more  titles,  and  Udy-mu's  were 

Vv  and   4^  ESj.     The   first   was   originally   read   by   Prof    Petrie   (who 

discovered  many  contemporary  monuments  of  this  king  at  Abydos)  "  The  Horus 
Den,"  but  Sethe  has  shewn  that  the  more  probable  reading  is  "  The  Horus 
Wdy-mw"  (Sethe,  Beitriige  ziir  altesten  Geschichte  Aegyptens,  pp.  39-41).     The 

second   name — Kt^,  to  be  read  either  Khaskheti  "the  Foreigner,"  or  Semti 

"the  Desert  man," — is  preceded  by  the  double  title  "King  of  Upper  and  Lower 
Egypt,"  and  curiously  enough  it  is  found  in  later  Egyptian  documents  under 
several  different  forms.  The  reason  for  these  different  forms  is  obvious  to  anyone 
acquainted  with  hieratic  writing  ;  unless  very  carefully  written  the  hieratic  of  ^^''^ 
can  easily  be  mistaken  for  the  hieratic  form  of  both  1— t— <  and  3fflE.     Now  the 

scribe  who  drew  up  the  Turin  Papyrus  List  of  Kings  wrote  the  name  1^^  in 

hieratic  thus  : — 


'  Fi!T.      I.  ' 


Fig. 

This  would  give  the  reading  Sp-ty  (Sep-tt)  or  Hsp-ty  {Hesepli^,  but  as  Griflfith  has 
pointed  out  {R.T.,  I,  p.  38)  a  form  found  in  the  XVHIth  dynasty  papyrus  of  Nu 

r^^^^  (Budge,  Book  of  the  Dead,  Text,  p.  145)  may  show  that  this  "was 
intended  to  represent  Stn-ty  {Sem-ti)"  The  scribe  of  Sety  I's  List  of  Kings  at 
Abydos  gives  us  {  ^^  J  Sp-ty  {Sep-ti)  or  Hsp-ty  {Hesepti)  and  other  forms 
found  in  ancient  documents  are  (  \^^      (Brugsch,  Rec.  de  Mons.,  II,  PH.  85-107) 


and 


f  Z}Z,=^  J  (Lepsius,  Todtenlnich,  PI.  53).  The  sign  h-hh,  it  should  be 
pointed  out,  has  usually  the  value  kn.  By  Manetho's  time  in  the  third  century  B.C. 
there  were  therefore  at  least  two  mistaken  readings  of  the  original  name  ^^,  and 

the  Egyptian  historian  reading  his  hieroglyphs  1— +— 1  and  ^ffffF  quite  correctly  as 
kn  {ken)  and  lisp  {hesp)  entered  two  separate  kings'  names,  Kenkenes  and  Usaphais, 
in  his  list.     Thus  we  have  the  following  names  of  one  and  the  same  1st  dynasty 
king  circulating  in  Egyptian  literature  at  the  present  day : — 
The  Horus  Den  (Petrie). 

„         Wdy-mw  (Sethe). 
The  King  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  Setui  (Petrie). 

„  „  „  Semti  (Griffith,  Hall). 

„  „  „  Khaskheti  (Sethe). 

„  „  „  Hesepti  (Sety's  Abydos  list). 


King  Udy-niu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone.  149 

Kenkenes  (Manetho  from  the  form  [  |~|~|  J). 
USAPHAIS   (Manetho  from  the  form  C  "^^  1 ). 

In  this  atoticle  the  forms  Udy-mu  and  Khaskheti  will  be  used. 

The  Palermo  Stone  takes  its  name  from  the  Palermo  Museum,  where  it  is  now 
preserved  ;  it  is  a  fragment  of  a  large  tablet  inscribed  in  the  Vth  dynasty,  recording 
the  Annals  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  from  Mena,  the  first  king  of  the  united  country, 
down  to  the  time  when  the  monument  was  set  up.  The  Annals  are  set  out  in  great 
detail  year  by  year,  and  it  seems  hardly  possible  that  such  accuracy  was  obtainable 
by  tradition  only,  for  a  period  so  remote  from  the  Vth  dynasty  as  was  the  1st  dynasty. 
We  can  therefore  but  imagine  that  records  of  the  chief  events  had  been  kept  year  by 
year,  and  that  the  scribes  of  the  Vth  dynasty  had  access  to  them.  This  would 
be  quite  in  keeping  with  early  custom,  for  we  find  in  Babylonia,  for  instance, 
documents  dated  not  by  the  year  of  the  king's  reign  but  by  the  chief  event  in  that 
year.  Thus  under  Bur-sin  of  Babylonia  we  find  a  document  dated  in  the  "  year  in 
which  he  destroyed  the  city  Shashru"  (cf  SCHAFER,  Ein  Bruchstiick  Altdgyptisclier 
Annate II,  printed  in  the  Abhandlungen  der  Kbnigl.  Preuss.  Ak.  d.  Wissensch.  zu  Berlin, 
1902,  p.  10).  In  making  use  of  the  Palermo  Stone  we  are  badly  hampered  by  its 
fragmentary  condition,  which  isolates  long  records  of  reigns  to  which  we  cannot 
attach  the  king's  name.  If  by  any  means  some  of  the  events  of  one  of  these  reigns 
can  be  identified,  so  that  we  can  supply  the  missing  name,  then  a  considerable 
point  will  have  been  gained. 

Now  Schafer  has  pointed  out  that  in  other  ancient  documents  we  get  references 
to  the  same  or  similar  events  as  are  recorded  on  the  Palermo  Stone  {ibid.,  p.  8) 
Hence  if  we  can  find  any  series  of  events  thus  recorded  and  in  conjunction  with  the 
name  of  the  king  under  whom  they  took  place,  and  further  can  find  on  the  Palermo 
Stone  a  group  of  similar  events  recorded  under  one  reign,  then  it  will  not  be  too  far 
a  cry  to  assign  the  king  given  in  the  named  set  of  records  to  the  similar  set  which 
bears  no  royal  name.  Now,  in  the  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone  we  know  we  are 
dealing  with  a  period  between  the  pre-dynastic  age  and  the  Ilnd  dynasty,  because 
this  row  comes  after  the  first,  which  gives  the  names  of  the  kings  of  Lower  Egypt 
when  the  kingdom  was  not  yet  united,  and  before  the  fourth,  which  names  Netery-mu 
a  king  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty.  The  third  row,  therefore,  deals  with  the  events  of  the 
1st  or  early  Ilnd  dynasty,  and  it  is  among  the  named  records  of  these  dynasties 
that  we  must  search  for  our  parallels. 

Fortunately  such  sets  of  named  records  of  these  dynasties  have  been  found  at 
the  Royal  Tombs  of  Abydos.  They  will  therefore  form  a  convenient  corpus  for  the 
purpose  of  comparison.  Fortunately  again,  the  records  of  the  third  row  are  not 
easily  to  be  confused  with  those  of  any  other  reign,  as  many  of  them  only  occur 
here.  Hence  there  should  be  no  difficulty  in  deciding  to  which  of  the  sets  of  the 
named  records  of  Abydos  they  conform,  and  in  this  way  discovering  the  king  whose 
annals  form  this  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone. 

Sethe  has  suggested  Miebis  (Mer-pa-ba)  as  the  name  which  is  lacking,  but  finds 
difficulty  in  making  the  necessary  length  of  the  reign  recorded  on  the  third  row  of 
the  Palermo  Stone  coincide  with  the  twenty-six  years  given  by  Manetho  to  this 
king  (Sethe,  Beitrdgc  ziir  Altesten  Gesch.  Agyptens,  p.  48).  Unfortunately  we 
are  unable  to  test  the  claims  of  Miebis  by  appealing  to  his  Abydos  documents,  as 
those  remaining  to  us  are  not  of  an  annalistic  nature,  and  so  cannot  be  compared 
with  the  record  of  the  Palermo  Stone. 

K  3 


150 


King  Udy-tnu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone, 


0 


ji 


til 


31 


c< 


ro 


-J        Z 

o 

H 

o 

% 

•< 


z 

z 


o 

CO       c^ 


O"  § 


-s 

IX, 


c< 


rt 


King  Udy-iiiu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone. 


ISI 


O 
<     . 


9  u 


00(5  ' 


K   4 


152 


King  Udy-mu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone. 


The  documents  of  another  king — Udymu — however,  compare  in  a  marited 
degree  with  the  records  of  this  third  row.  These  documents  consist  of  inscribed 
tablets  and  clay  sealings  recovered  from  his  tomb  at  Abydos,  and  for  comparison 
here  each  is  added  to  the  record  from  this  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone  which  it 
resembles.  The  numbers  refer  to  those  which  we  have  placed  below  the  inscription 
in  Fig.  2. 


3.  Palermo. 
Abydos. 


8.  Paler) no. 
Abydos. 


2.  Palermo.     "  Smiting  of  the  Inu  "  (People  of  the  Eastern  desert  and  Sinai). 
Abydos.       Tablet  of  Udymu  (SpiEGELKERG,  A.Z.,  XXXV,  p.  8).     "  First 
Smiting  of  the  East." 

"Appearance  of  the  King  of  the  South.  Appearance  of  the 
King  of  the  North.     Sed  festival." 

Fragment  of  a  tablet  of  Udymu  (Petrie,  R.T.,  I.,  pi.  xi,  5,  14) 
showing  the  raised  pavilion  of  the  Sed  festival,  and  inscribed 
with  the  king's  name. 

Opening  of  the  lake  of  the  house  Isut-Neteru. 

Tablet  of  the  Horus  Udymu  King  of  the  South  and  Khaskheti 
(AmelINEAU,  Nouvelles  fouilles,  1897-8,  xxxvii,  3;  also 
Petrie,  R.T.,  I,  pi.  xi,  14,  15)  recording  among  other  things 
the  "  opening  of  the  door  of  the  water?"  and  showing  a  hoe 
breaking  away  the  earth  of  an  embankment?  Marked  x  in 
Fig.  5. 

8.  Palermo.     Shooting  of  the  hippopotamus. 

Abydos.  Sealings  of  the  Horus  Udymu  (King  of  the  South  and  North) 
Khaskheti  (Petrie,  R.T.,  II,  pi.  vii,  5,  6;  R.T.,  I,  pi.  xiv,  8) 
showing  a  hippopotamus  attacking  a  man,  and  the  harpooning 
of  a  crocodile.  See  also  Fig.  8,  a  tablet  of  Udymu,  and  also 
Fig.  10. 

9.  Palermo.     "  Residence  in  Henen-nysut  (Heracleopolis)  and  at  the  lake  of 

the  temple  of  Hery-she-f." 
Abydos.       Fragment  of  a  tablet  (Petrie,  R.T.,  II,  pi.  vii,  8),  showing  a  ram 
temple,  probably  that  of  the  ram-headed  god  Hery-she-f,  and 
naming  a  king  of  the  South  and  North  who  from  the  fragment 
of  the  duplicate  tablet  figured  alongside  is  probably  Khaskheti. 

ri.  Palermo.     "  Birth  of  the  God  Sed." 

Abydos.  Sealing  of  the  Horus  Udymu  (PETRIE,  R.T.,  I,  pi.  xxxii,  39) ; 
showing  besides  the  harpooning  of  some  animal,  a  close 
connection  between  the  king  and  two  gods,  one  of  whom  is 
Sed,  the  jackal  on  a  standard  crossed  by  a  mace. 

13.  Palermo.     Birth  of  Seshat  and  Mafdet. 

Abydos.  Sealing  of  the  Horus  Udymu  (Petrie,  R.T.,  I,  xxxii,  39;  also 
R.T.,  II,  vii,  7,  10,  see  Fig.  10).  Besides  the  above-named 
scenes  King  Udymu  is  also  shown  in  connection  with  the 
standard  of  the  goddess  Mafdet. 

Here,  then,  we  find  that  out  of  a  total  of  fourteen  records  of  this  row  on  the 
Palermo  Stone,  seven  are  found  among  the  named  annalistic  monuments  of  Abydos 
which  belong  to  Udymu.  The  Palermo  Stone  records  much  that  does  not  appear 
on  these  monuments  from  Abydos,  and  of  course  there  are  other  tablets  of  Udymu's 
— such  for  instance  as  R.T.,  I,  pi.  xv.  No.  18,  Abydos,  I,  xi,  8,  naming  the  city  of 
Went — which  find  no  parallel  among  the  incomplete  annals  of  the  Stone.     Thus  it 


King  Udy-mu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone.  153 

is  an  inconclusive  argument  which  Sethe  brings  (^Bettrdge,  pp.  47, 48)  that  Usaphais 
(Udymu,  Khaskheti)  cannot  be  the  king  of  this  third  row,  because  no  mention  of  the 
worship  of  Horus  is  found  here,  whereas  it  is  found  on  his  tablets  from  Abydos.  It 
therefore  seems  that  the  weight  of  evidence  is  at  present  greatly  in  favour  of  Udymu 
being  the  king  whose  annals  are  recorded  in  the  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone. 

There  is  yet  another  fact  which  would  point  to  the  same  conclusion,  and 
again  a  further  one  which  points  away  from  Miebis,  whom  Sethe  suggested  as 
the  king  of  this  row,  and,  if  it  points  to  any  one,  it  points  towards  Udymu. 
Both  of  these  would  thus  form  subsidiary  points  of  evidence  in  favour  of  our  thesis. 

They  are:  (i)  the  use  of  the  title  ^^,  king  of  the  South  and  North;  (2)  the 

probable  length  of  thirty-two  years  for  the  reign  recorded  in  this  row. 

Griffith  has  noted  {R.T.,  II,  p.  52)  that  the  title  "  king  of  the  South  and  North" 
does  not  occur  before  Udymu,  and  in  our  illustrations  we  get  instances  of  its  use 
in  his  reign  (Figs.  5,  9).  Now  the  first  time  this  double  title  appears  on  the 
Palermo  Stone  is  in  our  third  row,  where  it  occurs  once  only,  in  No.  3  of  Fig.  2. 
Afterwards  it  appears  several  times  in  the  later  reigns.  This,  then,  is  one  subsidiary 
connection  of  the  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone  with  the  reign  of  Udymu. 

For  the  second  point  it  must  be  remarked  that  Schafer  {Ein  Bruchstiick,  p.  21) 
has  deduced  a  length  of  at  least  thirty-two  years  for  this  reign.  This  is  arrived  at 
by  means  of  the  knowledge,  given  us  by  the  fourth  row,  that  each  king's  name  is 
written  over  the  middle  of  the  space  allotted  to  his  reign.  The  fourth  line  also 
shews  us  that  besides  the  royal  name  some  particulars  are  entered  as  well. 

Now  fortunately  in  the  space  above  our  third  row  allotted  to  these  royal 
names  and  particulars,  we  have  the  end  of  such  an  entry  (Fig.  2).  This  shews  that 
the  broken  record  begins  within  a  year  or  two  of  the  middle  of  the  reign,  and  there 
are  fourteen  years  registered  before  the  record  breaks  off  again.  Hence  there  must 
have  been  at  least  fourteen  more  years  recorded  on  the  other  half  now  lost.  This 
gives  twenty-eight  years  at  the  very  least  for  the  reign  before  us.  On  the  analogy 
of  the  fourth  row,  five  or  six  year  spaces  may  well  be  allowed  for  the  space  under 
the  name,  of  which  two  are  already  accounted  for,  one  in  each  of  the  two  sets  of 
fourteen,  leaving  three  or  four  to  be  added  to  the  total  of  twenty-eight  already 
arrived  at,  thus  making  28  -|-  4  =  32.  There  may  also  be  one  or  two  years  to  be 
added  at  either  end  of  the  row,  as  we  do  not  know  that  the  last  year  visible  on  the 
broken  stone  was  the  last  year  of  the  reign.  Thus,  then,  the  king  of  the  third  row 
cannot  have  reigned  less  than  twenty-eight  years,  probably  reigned  thirty-two 
years,  and  may  have  reigned  a  little  longer.  Hence  the  length  of  reign  indicated 
for  this  third  row  precludes  Miebis  (Mer-pa-ba)  to  whom  Manetho  only  gives 
twenty-six  years  while  Eratosthenes  gives  less  still — nineteen.  There  is,  however, 
one  king  the  length  of  whose  reign  is  in  accordance  with  the  probable  length  of  the 
reign  of  this  third  row.  This  is  Kenkenes — a  name  thrust  in  by  Manetho  along 
with  that  of  Uenephes  ;  but  without  emendation  the  forms  of  neither  of  them  can 
be  made  to  agree  with  any  of  the  names  of  the  1st  dynasty  known  either  from  the 
contemporary  relics  or  yet  from  any  of  the  Egyptian  lists  ;  and  neither  of  them  are 
known  to  Eratosthenes,  though  his  list  is  too  imperfect  to  have  much  weight. 

Now  it  is  well  known  that  though  Manetho  may  be  a  valuable  guide  for  the 
general  sum  and  extent  of  Egyptian  history,  yet  he  cannot  be  implicitly  relied  on 
for  details  {vide  for  instance  his  XVIIIth  dynasty).  Such  being  the  state  of  affairs 
it  is  very  fortunate  that  both  of  these  difficult  names  are  susceptible  of  some 
explanation.     Maspero  {Rec.  de  Trav.,  XVII,  p.  65)  has  shown  that  Uenephes  is  an 


154  King  Udy-mu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone. 

exact  transcription  of  Unnefer  (Osiris) — a  name  which  is  often  written  in  a 
cartouche.  In  some  way  it  has  slipped  in  here.  As  to  the  other  name  it  has 
already  been  shown  that  Kenkenes  may  quite  possibly  be  a  misreading  of  Khaskheti 
(Udymu)  as  is  the  name  Usaphais.  It  is  therefore  perhaps  significant  that  the 
number  of  years  entered  against  Kenkenes'  reign  (Africanus  31,  Eusebius  39) 
compare  well  with  the  number  deducible  from  the  Palermo  Stone  (32  or  more). 
This  then  makes  a  further  subsidiary  piece  of  evidence  that  the  third  line  of  the 
Palermo  Stone  does  not  record  the  reign  of  Miebis(Mer-pa-ba),  but  probably  records 
that  of  Udymu  (Usaphais). 

Thus  the  result  of  the  foregoing  is  to  shew  that  there  is  a  considerable  body 
of  converging  evidence  respecting  these  records  in  :— 

1.  The  recording  on  the  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone  of  a  number  of  the 

same  events  as  are  found  on  the  named  records  of  Udymu. 

2.  The  use  of  the  double  title  4^>  !*•"&  of  the  South  and  North,  which  is  not 

known  to  occur  earlier  than  Udymu,  and  on  the  Palermo  Stone  is  found 
for  the  first  time  on  this  third  row,  and  often  later. 

3.  The  length  of  the  reign  recorded  in  this  row  agrees  most  closely  with  that 

of  Kenkenes,  which  name  is  proved  to   be  a  corruption   of  Khaskheti 
(Udymu). 

This  evidence  all  converges  to  shew  that  Udymu  (Khaskheti)  is  the  king  whose 
reign  is  recorded  on  the  third  row  of  the  Palermo  Stone. 

Merneit  or  Meryt-Neit. 

Having  shewn  to  whom  this  row  of  Annals  on  the  Palermo  Stone  is  likely  to 

refer,  it  becomes  necessary  to  treat  the  three  signs  ||4         J|  above  the  row.     To 

elucidate  these  it  becomes  necessary  again  to  turn  to  the  heading  of  the  fourth 
row,  which  reads  Ntry'imv  rn  Nb  .  .  .  ,  translated  as  "  King  Horus  Neter-en 
(Netery-mu)  the  child  of  Nub  .  .  .  .  "  (Sethe  in  Garstang's  MaMsna  and 
Bet  Khallaf,  p.  20  ;  SciI.\FER,  Bruchstilck,  p.  22).  Here,  then,  Netery-mu  is  named 
with   his   mother,   and  such    is   entirely    suitable   to   the   final    fragment   of  our 

inscription,  which  is  shewn  by  the  determinative  J|  to  be  the  remains  of  a  woman's 

name  ;    this  woman  should  by  this  analogy  be  the  mother  of    Udymu.      Sethe 

{Beitrdge,  pp.  29,  47)  has  suggested  the  restoration  of  this  name  as    /|    *"^r.  J| , 

Meryt-Neit,  and  has  brought  evidence  to  shew  that  the  well-known  personage 
Merneit,  as  the  name  was  at  first  read,  was  a  woman  and  not  a  man.  Meryt-Neit 
then,  in  all  probability,  must  have  been  the  mother  of  Udymu. 

Meryt-Neit's  position  as  mother  of  Udymu  fits  in  well  with  the  place  assigned 
to  the  bearer  of  this  name  by  Prof.  Petrie  {R.T.,  II,  p.  viii)  next  before  Udymu 
(Den-setui) ;  it  also  fits  with  the  probability  that  she  died  under  Udymu  (Usaphais) 
in  that  he  provided  her  tomb  equipment  (Sethe,  Beitrdge,  p.  30), — a  most  natural 
thing  for  a  son  to  do.  It  is  perhaps  a  duty  more  likely  to  fall  on  her  son  than  on 
her  husband,  which  would  have  been  the  case  under  Sethe's  supposition  that  she 
was  the  wife  of  Usaphais  (Udymu)  and  the  mother  of  Miebis  (Mer-pa-ba)  (Sethe, 
Beitrdge,  p.  30).  It  remains  a  question  whether  Miebis  (Mer-pa-ba)  may  have 
been  also  her  son  as  well  as  Udymu  ;  but  it  seems  clear  that  Miebis  cannot  be  the 
king  of  the  third  line  of  the  Palermo  Stone. 


King  Udy-iHu  (Den)  and  the  Palermo  Stone.  155 

We  now  know  two  queens  of  the  early  1st  dynasty ;  Meryt-Ncit  the  mother 
of  Udymu,  and  the  earlier  queen  Hotep,  a  princess  of  Sais  and  the  wife  of  Narmer- 
Mena  (NEWBERRY,  P.S.B.A.,  1906,  p.  69).  We  also  know  that  sixteen  out  of 
seventy  of  the  private  stelae  found  round  the  tomb  of  Zer, — a  predecessor  of 
Udymu — beai'mames  compounded  with  Neit,  the  well-known  goddess  of  Sais  in 
the  Delta.  From  Naga  ed-Der  we  find  in  the  golden  object  inlaid  with  her  symbol 
another  piece  of  evidence  of  the  importance  of  Neit  during  the  1st  dynasty 
(Reisner,  Early  Dynastic  Cemeteries,  I,  pi.  6,  p.  139),  and  on  a  certain  type  of 
cylinder  seals  of  the  1st  dynasty  bearing  private  names,  no  less  than  seventy-five 
per  cent,  of  the  names  are  compounded  with  the  name  of  Neit  (Newberry,  Scarabs, 
p.  51).  It  seems  therefore  that  these  southern  kings  with  their  capital  in  Upper 
Egypt  were  marrying  princesses  from  this  important  city  of  Lower  Egypt,  the  home 
of  the  Neit  worshippers,  and  so  ingratiating  themselves  with  their  newly  acquired 
subjects  in  the  North  (NEWBERRY — GarSTANG,  Short  History,  pp.  19,  26). 

This  group  of  Neit  names  implies  that  just  at  this  time  there  was  a  strong 
colony  of  Neit-worshippers  at  the  court  of  these  southern  kings  composed  of 
princesses  and  their  retinue  (Newberry,  P.S.B.A.,  1906,  pp.  69,  70). 

Percy  E.  Newberry. 
G.  A.  Wainwright. 


(     156     ) 


COPTIC    STELE   OF   APA   TELEME. 

This  stele  was  found  in  Upper   Egypt,  and  bought  by  Prof.   Flinders  Petrie   in 
191 3.     Now  in  the  Institut  Biblique,  Rome.     Copied  by  Mrs.  Petrie. 

!  The  Father,  the  Son,  the  Holy  f  Spirit.  Our  father  Michael,  our  f  father 
Gabriel,  our  Lady  mother  '  Mary,  our  father  Adam,  our  1  mother  Zoe,  the  four 
and  twenty  f  elders,  our  fathers  the  ]  patriarchs,  our  fathers  the  "  prophets,  our 
fathers  the  apostles,  ^  our  fathers  the  martyrs,  our  '1"  fathers  the  confessors,  our 
V  fathers  the  archbishops,  ',-  our  fathers  the  bishops,  our  ',"  fathers  the  great  men, 
father  [A]  ',*  polio,  father  Anup,  father  'f  Phib,  father  Makare  and  his  sons,  '1"  father 

Moses  and  his  brethren,  Y  father  Jeremias,  father  Enoch,  father  '1"  Joseph  the 

father  Ammoni  '1"  of  Pseteshons,  father  -|"  Polloni  the  martyr,  ^  all  the  holy  ones. 
Remember  y  Apa  Teleme  of  Poureh,  f  who  [rested]  the  fourth  day  -,'  of 

Notes. 

L.  5.  "  Our  mother  Zoe."     The  name  of  Eve  as  given  in  the  LXX. 

L.  13.  "  The  great  men."  This  expression  appears  to  apply  to  the  names  which 
follow. 

LL.  14,  15.  Apollo,  Anup  and  Phib  are  the  three  saints  of  Bawit,  a  village  on 
the  west  side  of  the  river  opposite  Tell  el-Amarna.  It  was  the  site  of  the  ancient 
monastery  founded  by  Apa  Apollo.  The  remains  of  the  monastery  were  first  noted 
by  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie  (TV//  el-Amarna,  map),  and  were  excavated  later  by 
M.  Jean  Cledat  {Mi-moires  de  I'Institute  Franqais,  XII,  XIII).  Apa  Apollo  as  the 
founder  of  one  of  the  great  monasteries  of  Egypt  is  included  in  the  invocations  of 
saints  which  constantly  occur  in  Coptic  inscriptions  ;  his  name  is  usually  followed 
bj'  those  of  Apa  Anup  and  Apa  Phib.  His  day  is  celebrated  on  Mechir  5  ;  Phib, 
who  is  called  Abib  in  the  Synaxarium,  is  commemorated  on  Paophi  25.  From  the 
fact  that  Apollo,  Anup,  and  Phib  head  the  list  of  saints  and  are  therefore  in  the 
most  prominent  position,  it  seems  likely  that  the  stele  came  originally  from  Bawit. 

L.  15.  In  this,  as  in  the  line  immediately  following,  the  two  words,  um  Kieq 
"  And  his,"  are  written  as  one,  one  ki  being  omitted. 

L.  16.  Apa  Moses  was  the  local  saint  of  Baliana.  He  founded  a  monastery  in 
that  district,  but  it  is  not  cerfain  whether  at  Baliana  itself  or  at  Abydos. 

L.  17.  Apa  Jeremias  and  Apa  Enoch  are  the  local  saints  of  Saqqara.  The 
monastery  of  Jeremias,  near  the  Step-pyramid,  was  first  located  by  Sir  Gaston 
Maspero,  and  excavated  later  by  Mr.  Qui  bell  for  the  Department  of  Antiquities 
(QuiBELL,  Excavations  at  Saqqara).  Among  the  inscriptions  found  are  three  which 
refer  to  Jeremias  as  a  person  and  not  merely  as  a  legendary  saint ;  one  is  on  a  block 
of  stone,  "  the  seat  of  Apa  Jeremias  "  ;  another  is  on  a  paving-stone  in  the  floor  of 
the  "  Refectory,"  containing  the  very  interesting  statement  that  "  This  is  the  spot 
on  which  our  lord  and  father  Apa  Jeremias  bowed  himself,  until  he  removed  the 
sins  of  the  people  of  the  whole  world  " ;  the  third  gives  the  dates  of  his  birth,  of  his 
tonsuring,  of  his  ordination,  and  of  his  death. 

Apa  Enoch,  who  is  usually  mentioned  in  the  lists  with  Apa  Jeremias,  is  the 
Enoch  of  the  Bible.  He  was  commemorated  about  the  end  of  Epiphi,  the  actual 
day  appearing  to  vary. 


Coptic  Stele  of  Apa  Teleme. 


157 


MMi5iiMiaXFry#ocTNrtisr 


Sm^gfiOAODTHCBI& 


"WTg 


eTou. 


n  AP  f  An  eN  eiojTa  xWt£MKl 


?^^^^^ 


2^^R|Tfia<oTroE 


WTA, 


rACNcjx  Ai 


V 


I  :3 


Coptic  Stele  of  Apa  Teleme. 


H.  F.  P. 


158  Coptic  Stele  of  Apa  Teleme. 

L.  18.  ncopuH.  This  title  or  epithet  of  Apa  Joseph  is  one  of  which  I  have 
no  knowledge. 

L.  19.  Pseteshons  appears  to  be  a  place  name.  Near  Bawit  was  a  place  called 
Terotashans  (ZOEGA,  366)  or  Terotnshoons  (H.\LL,  Greek  Texts,  p.  144);  it  would 
seem  likely  that  Pseteshons,  which  has  the  same  termination,  would  be  in  the  same 
neighbourhood. 

L.  22.  Api  nueeTH  iJ  is  the  usual  form.  I  would  suggest  that  the  sculptor 
has  confused  this  formula  with  the  other  funerary  formula  Api  otmoctmma  um  . 

The  name  Teleme  is  also  found  as  Deleme  {cp.  Crum.,  Coptic  MSS.  from  the 
Fayyum.     No.  XXIII,  11.  10,  11). 

Poureh  appears  to  be  a  place  name,  orpe?,  a  masculine  word,  means  waste 
ground  near  buildings. 

L.  23.  The  position  of  the  small  fragment,  which  is  all  that  remains  of  the 
letter  u,  shows  that  the  word  was  written  MTAqeuTOU. 

M.  A.  MURRAY. 


(     159     ) 


^ 


EGYPT   IN   AFRICA. 


{Continued^ 


Royal  functions. 

24.  The  chief  as  priest. 

25.  The  king  killed  before  old  age. 

26.  Indirect  mention  of  king's  death. 

27.  Sister  marriage. 

28.  Honour  of  the  royal  placenta. 

29.  Importance  of  leopard's  skin. 

30.  Potency  of  the  ox  tail. 

31.  Ensign  of  the  saw  fish. 


32- 
33- 
34- 
35- 
36. 


Beliefs. 

The  mundane  spirit  world. 
Every  object  has  its  spirit. 
The  ancestral  spirit. 
The  roads  of  the  future. 
Twins  human  and  animal. 

37.  Ram-headed  gods. 

38.  The  bull  god. 

39.  Totemism  and  animal  clans. 

40.  The  sacred  sycomore  fig  tree. 

41.  Red  cattle  sacrificed. 

42.  Animal  skulls  hung  up. 

43.  Divination  by  objects  thrown. 


Material  products. 

44.  Red  and  white  pottery. 

45.  Red  and  black  pottery. 

46.  Mud  toys. 

47.  Wooden  head-rests. 

48.  Wooden  hoes. 

49.  Double  process  spinning. 

50.  Flat  ground-loom. 

51.  Mosquito  nets. 

52.  Harpoon. 

53.  Drag  net. 

54.  Hand  net. 

55.  Basket  traps. 

56.  Ring  snares. 

57.  Cone  on  the  head. 

Laie  Influence  from  Egypt. 

58.  Terracotta  Nigerian  heads. 

59.  The  classical  patterns. 

60.  Interwoven  patterns. 

61.  Architectural  style. 


In  addition  to  the  various  authorities  named  in  the  previous  article  on  this  subject, 
there  is  to  be  added  here  (K)  On  the  bcukivaters  of  the  Nile,  by  A.  L.  KiTCHiNG 
(1912). 

Royal  functions. 

24.  The  chief  as  priest. — "  Sometimes  a  man  approaches  his  deceased  relations 
on  his  own  behalf;  but,  as  a  rule,  it  is  the  chief  who  prays  and  sacrifices  on  behalf 
of  the  village."  (W.,  49.)  "  The  head  man  acts  (in  offering)  on  behalf  of  the 
village."  (W.,  53.)  Similarly  in  Egypt  all  offerings  were  considered  in  theory  to 
be  made  by  the  king,  the  formula  being  nesnt  dy  hetep,  "  may  the  king  give  an 
offering  "  ;  and  the  figure  of  the  king  is  sometimes  represented  making  the  offering 
to  the  deceased. 

25.  The  king  killed  before  old  age.  Among  the  Shilluks  "  the  king  must  not  be 
allowed  to  become  ill  or  senile,  lest  with  his  diminishing  vigour  the  cattle  should 
sicken  and  fail  to  bear  their  increase,  the  crops  should  rot  in  the  fields,  and  man, 
stricken  with  disease,  should  die  in  ever  increasing  numbers  .  .  .  Any  «/a;r/ (child 
of  the  king)  has  the  right  to  attempt  to  kill  the  king,  and,  if  successful,  to  reign  in 


l6o  Egypt  in  Africa. 

his  stead  ....  It  was  said  to  be  a  point  of  honour  for  the  ret  (king)  not  to  call 
the  herdsmen  to  his  assistance."  (S.,  221-2.)  "Every  Dinka  high  chief  is  killed 
in  his  old  age,  this  being  done  at  his  own  request  with  all  ceremony  and 
reverence  .  .  .  The  Wawanga  .  .  .  also  kill  their  king  .  .  .  The  custom  of  king 
killing,  in  a  somcivhat  modified  form,  is  also  found  among  the  Banyoro ;  .  .  as  soon 
as  the  king  felt  unwell  and  thought  he  was  about  to  die  .  .  .  his  chief  wife  was 
allowed  to  visit  him  ...  he  asked  her  for  'the  cup'  .  .  he  drained  it,  and  in 
a  moment  was  dead."  (H.,  72-3.)  On  the  Niger,  "  These  Ogboni  are  the  '  Elders,' 
the  oldest  members  of  the  families  held  in  the  highest  esteem,  and  pledged  to  work 
together  by  the  most  solemn  sacrificial  ties  from  which  there  is  no  release ;  .  .  .  . 
while  keeping  a  jealous  eye  on  the  even  balance  of  prestige  among  themselves,  they 
pull  the  strings  which  make  the  principal  civic  power,  the  Bale,  dance  like  a 
marionette  at  their  behest.  They  elect  this  Bale,  give  him  their  instructions,  control 
him,  keep  him  under  the  closest  observation,  and  quietly  remove  him  should  he 
ever  dream  of  undertaking  anything  on  his  own  account  without  due  regard  to  the 
interests  and  dignity  of  the  Ogboni  League.  .  .  .  They  immediately  send  him  an 
ominous  token,  and  if  he  does  not  forthwith  commit  suicide  on  its  receipt,  the  poor 
Bale  is  very  soon  poisoned.  It  is  not  so  very  long  ago  that  every  Bale,  who  had 
served  his  statutory  two  years  of  office,  was  murdered  in  conformity  with  the  laws 
of  a  very  ancient  ritual."  (F.,  56-7.)  "  And  if  still  further  evidence  should  be 
thought  necessary  to  prove  the  profundity  of  these  people's  religious  life  and  habit 
of  mind,  I  will  say  in  addition  that  they  still  practise  the  pre-historic  custom  of  the 
Ethiopians  referred  to  by  Pliny  and  Diodorus  the  Sicilian :  they  doom  their  kings 
to  their  death  within  a  few  years  of  their  reign  and  do  so  because  otherwise  the 
earth  would  no  longer  yield  the  fruits  upon  which  they  depend  in  due  season.  The 
custom  is  dreadful  and  cruel."     (F.,  676.) 

The  greatest  religious  festival  in  Egypt  was  that  of  the  sed,  or  termination  of 
the  king's  earthly  life,  when  he  was  assimilated  to  Osiris  and  became  one  with  the 
god.  Doubtless  this  was  originally  his  earthly  death,  as  in  Africa  ;  but  by  appoint- 
ing then  his  successor  to  marry  the  royal  daughter,  and  inherit  the  kingdom,  the 
Egyptian  felt  free  to  modify  the  custom,  and  after  deification  the  king  continued 
to  reign  till  his  natural  decease. 

26.  Indirect  mention  of  the  king's  death. — "  Among  the  Efik  and  Ibibio,  to 
announce  the  death  of  a  king  or  chief  either  very  suddenly,  or  too  soon,  is  considered 
a  great  dishonour,  especially  in  the  case  of  a  son,  who  must  only  be  informed 
indirectly  by  an  allusion  or  a  hint.     The  body  is  preserved  by  dessication."     (L.,  170.) 

This  explains  the  passage  in  the  tale  of  Sanehat,  where  the  king's  death  is 
announced  by  saying  that  a  hawk  had  flown  to  heaven. 

27.  Sister  marriage. — "  The  Bahima,  the  Banyoro,  and  the  Baganda,  are  all 
totemic  and  observe  the  ordinary  rules  of  clan  exogamy,  yet  the  Bahima  marry 
their  sisters,  .  .  .  among  the  Banyoro  .  .  .  princes  might  cohabit  with  princesses. 
.  .  .  The  rule  was  for  princes  and  princesses  to  live  together  .  .  .  the  Baganda  .  .  . 
clan  ex^ogamy  was  strictly  observed,  except  in  the  case  of  the  ruling  prince,  who,  on 
becoming  king,  was  ceremonially  married  to  one  of  his  half  sisters.  .  .  .  We  thus 
reach  the  conclusion  that  brother-sister  marriage  was  a  widely  spread  early  Hamitic 
institution.  Nor  were  consanguineous  marriages  limited  to  the  royal  family,  or 
even  to  the  aristocracy,  for  the  practice  occurs  among  commoners  in  certain  Galla 
tribes  at  the  present  day."  (H.,  S9-61.)  The  Egyptian  custom  of  sister-marriage 
was  not  only  usual  in  the  royal  family  but  also  generally ;  so  much  so  that  a  wife 
was  commonly  called  a  sister.     In  Ethiopia- there  is  a  long  genealogy  of  the  queens 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


l6i 


in  maternal  descent,  each  married  to  her  brother.  The  custom  was  adopted  as  part 
of  the  royal  system  by  the  Ptolemies  ;  and  in  the  first  century  is  alluded  to  as  being 
general  by  Seneca(?)  in  the  Apocolocyntosis  (Ch.  8).  "  You  may  go  half-way  at 
Athens,  the  whole  way  at  Alexandria,"  referring  to  half-sister  marriage  at  one,  and 
full-sister  marri^e  at  the  other. 

28.  Honour  of  the  royal  placenta. — Among  the  Baganda  "  On  the  birth  of 
a  prince  the  umbilical  cord  is  dried  and  preserved,  placed  in  a  pot  which  is  made 
for  its  reception,  and  sealed  up  ;  the  pot  is  wrapped  in  bark  cloths  and  decorated 
with  beads  .  .  . ;  this  is  called  '  the  twin,'  and  has  a  house  built  for  its  abode  .  .  . 
The  umbilical  cord  of  the  king  was  decorated  and  treated  as  a  person.  Each  new 
moon  .  .  it  was  carried  in  state  .  .  .  After  the  king's  death  .  .  it  was  placed  in 
a  special  shrine  or  temple  with  the  king's  jaw-bone  which  is  spoken  of  as  the  '  king.' 
The  two  ghosts,  the  one  of  the  placenta,  the  other  of  the  dead  king  attached  to  the 
jawbone,  were  thus  brought  together  to  form  a  perfect  god  to  whom  offerings  were 
made  in  the  malolo.  The  malolo  or  temple  is  entirely  different  from  the  tomb  in 
which  the  king's  body  is  laid  ;  indeed,  the  malolo  is  built  some  months  after  the 
tomb,  often,  it  appears  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  latter."  (Roscoe  in 
H.,  68.)  Respect  is  also  given  to  the  placenta  among  the  Dinka,  Shilluk,  Bahima, 
and  many  other  tribes  of  the  Sudan  and  Nile  deserts.  (H.,  66-8.)  In  Egypt  one 
of  the  sacred  standards  carried  before  the  king,  is  called  the  "  Inner  thing  of  the 
king  "  or  the  "  Royal  Child,"  and  is  considered  by  Dr.  Seligmann  to  represent  the 
placenta.  Such  custom  as  that  of  the  Baganda  would  explain  a  most  puzzling 
feature  of  Egyptian  royal  burials,— the  two  tombs  often  found.  Several  kings  have 
two  pyramids,  or  a  pyramid  in  one  place  and  a  burial  elsewhere.  It  might  be 
thought  impossible  that  a  pyramid  would  be  built  for  the  placenta ;  but  the  second 
pyramid  exists,  and  such  an  explanation — by  existing  custom — is  at  least  more 
likely  than  any  arbitrary  guess  that  the  modern  "  inner  consciousness "  might 
produce. 

29.  hnportance  of  leopard's  skin. — •'"  Anyone  killing  a 
antelope  called  giek,  must  hand  over  the  skin  to  the 
could  wear  the  skin  of  the  giek,  but  his  sons,  grandsons, 
and  great-grandsons  might  wear  leopard  skins,  and  .  . 
some  old  and  important  men,  even  if  not  of  the  royal 
blood,  were  allowed  to  use  the  latter."  (S.,  217.)  In 
Egypt  in  early  sculptures  the  king's  descendants  wear 
the  leopard  skin  ;  and  in  later  times  the  officiating 
priest  might  wear  it,  probably  as  lieutenant  of  the 
priest-king. 

30.  Potency  of  the  ox  tail. — "  The  tail  of  the  ox,  called 
Mawso,  is  the  sign  of  office  of  all  the  Kongosovo  among 
the  Bavili  ;  thus  the  idea  of  obedience  to  one  in  authority 
is  implied."  (N.,  156.)  In  Egypt,  from  the  first  to  the 
last  dynasty,  the  king  always  wears  the  tail  of  an  o.x 
hanging  from  his  girdle.  It  may  be  further  connected 
with  the  king  being  called  "  the  strong  bull." 

3 1 .  Ensign  of  the  saw  fish. — "  Bafu  =  the  saw  fish, 
the  snout  of  which  the  Budungu  (king's  police)  carry  as  their  sign  of  office.  This 
snout  is  found  in  the  Xibila  "  (sacred  grove).  (N.,  156.)  The  saw-fish  snout  is 
twice  represented  on  the  barbaric  colossus  of  Min  of  the  pre-historic  age,  found 
at  Koptos  (Fig.  i ). 


leopard,  a  giraffe,  or  an 
king  .  .  .  only  the  king 


I.    Ensigm  of  the  Saw  fish, 

ON  Pre-historic  statue, 

Koptos. 


l62  Egypt  in  Africa. 


Beliefs. 


32.  The  mundane  spirit  world. — "  The  boundary  line  between  this  world  and 
the  next  is  .  .  .  the  entire  absence  of  death  or  dissolution  in  the  next  world  .  .  . 
So  it  is  that  they  have  neither  a  heaven  nor  a  hell,  spirit  land  being  merely 
a  continuance  of  this  life  on  exactly  the  same  conditions,  each  country  and 
community  having  its  allotted  portion,  and  each  individual  resuming  the  exact 
position  that  was  occupied  when  in  this  existence  ....  The  ground  there  is  just 
the  same  as  it  is  here,  the  earth  is  similar,  there  are  forests  and  hills  and  valleys, 
with  rivers  flowing,  and  roads  leading  from  one  town  to  another,  as  well  as  to 
houses  and  farms  ....  People  in  spirit  land  have  their  ordinary  occupations ; 
the  farmer  his  farm,  and  the  fisherman  his  nets  and  canoes."     (L.,  184-6.) 

Thus  in  Egypt  the  whole  future  life  was  an  exact  repetition  of  the  conditions 
on  earth,  as  has  been  illustrated  on  pp.  26,  28,  of  this  volume. 

33.  Every  object  lias  its  spirit. — "  Every  domestic  utensil  as  well  as  tool  or 
implement  ...  is  endowed  with  a  spirit  of  its  own,  that  in  its  deepest  essence  is 
the  animation  and  mover  of  the  article  in  question."  (L.,  181.)  Such  was  also  the 
belief  in  P^gypt,  where  every  object  had  its  name  and  individual  existence. 

34.  Tlie  ancestral  spirit. — "  Sometimes  the  spirit  of  a  person  recently  dead  is 
spoken  of  ?LSJok,  but  the  term  is  generally  reserved  for  the  spirits  of  long  dead  and 
powerful  ancestors  .  .  .  Although  theyoX'  may  send  sickness,  death  and  misfortune 
when  annoyed  or  neglected,  they  are  the  guardian  spirits  of  the  house  and  clan, 
taking  constant  interest  in  the  doings  of  their  descendants,  and  being  ever  ready 
to  help  them  .  .  .  The  jok  know  when  a  child  is  born,  and  protect  it  from  the 
very  beginning  .  .  .  The  jok  on  both  sides  of  the  family  protect  the  child  .  .  . 
A  man's y^^  are  ever  near  him  in  enterprise  or  danger."  (D.)  "  It  is  believed  that 
every  ordinary  individual,  male  or  female,  is  attended  by  a  guardian  spirit,  who  is 
looked  on  as  a  protector,  invariably  of  the  same  household,  and  with  whom  when 
alive  personal  friendship  or  attachment  has  existed.  Every  free  man  is  attended 
by  a  guardian  spirit,  usually  the  spirit  of  his  own  immediate  father."     (L.,  190.) 

The  African  beliefs  explain  what  has  long  been  a  debated  matter,  the  nature 
of  the  Egyptian  ka.  The  expressions  which  throw  light  on  the  ka  are  quoted  on 
pp.  22-4  of  this  volume  ;  and  the  conclusion  to  which  they  lead  is  that  the  ka  was 
an  ancestral  emanation  indwelling  in  each  man,  sent  by  the  ancestor  who  was  in 
the  future  world,  and  to  whom  the  man  would  go  at  his  death.  Such  conditions 
of  the  ka  are  well  illustrated  by  the  African  beliefs,  which  enable  us  thus  to  clear 
and  solidify  our  ideas  about  this  entity. 

35.  The  roads  of  t  lie  future. — -"There  is  a  series  of  traditional  stories,  each  of 
which  is  called  a  road,  a  pathway,  or  a  course."  (N.,  247.)  These  stories  are 
supposed  to  be  learned  by  every  priest.  Similarly  in  Egypt,  at  the  close  of  the 
Old  Kingdom,  there  was  a  series  of  recitals  of  sixteen  paths  or  ways,  as  on  the 
sarcophagus  of  Beb.     {Dendereh,  57.) 

36.  Tivins,  human  and  animal.— "  M.os\.  of  the  Dinka  clans  whose  token  is  an 
animal,  derive  their  origin  from  a  man  born  as  one  of  twins,  his  follow  twin  being 
an  animal  of  the  species  which  is  the  totem  of  the  clan."  (D.)  This  strange  idea 
is  also  seen  in  Egypt,  in  the  human  Shu  and  lion  Tefnut,  the  human  Horus  and 
animal  Set. 

37.  Ram-headed  god. — "  The  Ram-headed  Soudanese  gods  Ara  and  Ara-dungs 
are,  respectively,  the  Yoruban  names  for  the  storm  and  the  thunderbolt.  It  has 
just  been  shown  that  the  popular  idea  is  that  a  storm  is  produced  by  a  ram  .... 


Egypt  in  Africa.  163 

Among  those  inhabiting  the  East  far  from  the  Niger,  namely,  Houssa-  and  l^enue- 
land,  a  slight  change  in  the  conception  of  the  divine  Ram  has  taken  place,  with 
a  distinct  tendency  to  transform  the  Storm-god  to  a  Sun-god."     (F.,  219,  221.) 

"  Prof.  Flammand  found  large  paintings  in  Algiers,  south  of  Oran,  on  the 
cliffs,  depicting,  the  ram,  neckletted,  and  crowned  with  the  sun,  whose  rays  are 
similar  in  form  to  the  uraeus  serpent."     (P.,  225.) 

The  Ram  was  the  animal  of  the  Theban  Amen,  signalised  to  all  later  time 
by  the  horn  of  Alexander's  head,  adopted  as  token  of  his  descent  from  Amen  of 
the  Oasis,  which  gives  him  the  oriental  name  of  DIml-karnain.  The  Ram  was 
specially  worshipped  by  the  Ethiopians,  and  appears  often  on  monuments  of  the 
XXVth  dynasty.  There  was  also  a  very  important  worship  of  the  Ba  ram  of 
Mendes  in  the  Delta,  associated  with  Osiris,  and  dating  from  pre-historic  times,  see 
article  in  the  previous  number  on  "The  Earliest  Inscriptions." 

38.  The  bull  god. — "  With  the  ancient  Houssa,  however,  as  with  other  Eastern 
tribes,  it  was  the  bull,  and  not  the  ram  which  was  the  supreme  deity. 

The  godhead  represented  by  the  bull  was  Maikaffo  {I'ide  infra  concerning 
Maikaffo  and  the  Bull  gods  of  the  Ethiopians).  Maikaffo  had  a  wife,  whose  name 
was  Ra.  Now  Ra  is  the  mistress  of  the  sun,  or  Rana.  Now  the  sun  was  sunk 
into  the  sea  of  old  within  a  chest  of  stone.  The  sun  was  shut  up  therein  together 
with  a  white  ram.  None  could  bring  up  the  sun  and  his  companion  again  ;  Ra, 
the  goddess  of  the  Sun,  did  this ;  Ra  brought  the  sun  and  the  ram  into  the  upper 
world."     (P.,  222.) 

The  many  Bull  gods  of  Egypt  are  familiar,  from  Erment  down  to  the  Delta. 
It  may  be  only  a  coincidence  that  the  goddess  of  the  Sun  has  the  name  Ra,  for 
verbal  resemblances  are  worth  less  than  those  of  ideas  and  customs ;  yet  it  is  not 
at  all  unlikely  that  the  name  of  Ra  may  have  spread  from  Egypt  to  the  Niger, 
though  the  original  worship  came  apparently  from  the  East. 

39.  Totemism  and  animal  clans. — The  word  totem  has  been  somewhat  mis- 
understood, and  some  definitions  of  it  may  be  taken  first,  bearing  in  mind  the 
animal  worship  of  different  Egyptian  nomes  for  comparison.  "  A  totem  is  a  class 
of  material  objects  which  a  savage  regards  with  superstitious  respect,  believing  that 
there  exists  between  him  and  every  member  of  the  class  an  intimate  and  altogether 
special  relation  .  .  .  the  totem  protects  the  man,  and  the  man  shows  his  respect 
for  the  totem  in  various  ways,  by  not  killing  it  if  it  be  an  animal  ...  As 
distinguished  from  a  fetish,  a  totem  is  never  an  isolated  individual,  but  always 
a  class  of  objects,  generally  a  species  of  animals  or  plants."  (pRAZER,  Totemism,  3.) 
In  connection  with  this  observe  that  it  is  always  a  species  in  the  plural  that  is 
sacred  in  Egypt,  Heru  hawks,  Khnumii  rams,  etc.  "  The  Dinka  .  .  .  speak  of 
certain  animals  as  their  ancestors,  kzvar ;  the  kzvar  being  the  .  .  .  animal  '  who  is 
the  jok  of  the  clan '  (or  the  ancestral  emanation,  or  ka  in  Egyptian).  No  man 
injures  his  kwar  animal  but  all  respect  it  in  various  ways  ....  There  is  some 
evidence  that  when  a  clan  is  particularly  strong  in  a  given  locality,  its  members 
tend  to  forget  that  their  totem  is  but  one  among  many,  so  that  they  show 
annoyance  if  other  folk  do  not  treat  it  with  respect."  (D-)  Here  is  the  basis  of 
belief  which  fully  accounts  for  the  animal  ensigns  upon  the  slate  palettes, 
represented  as  fighting  and  acting,  and  for  the  violent  antipathies  between  the 
nomes,  based  upon  the  animals  being  sacred  in  one  nome  that  were  eaten  in 
another. 

40.  The  sacred  sycamore  fig-tree. — "Every  village  has  its  'prayer  tree'  under 
which  sacrifices  are  offered  .  .  and    is,  sometimes  at   any   rate,   a   wild   fig-tree. 

L  2 


i64 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


Livingstone  says :  '  It  is  a  sacred  tree  all  over  Africa  and  India  ' ;  and  I  learn  from 
M.  Auguste  Chevalier  that  it  is  found  in  every  village  of  Senegal  and  French 
Guiana,  and  looked  on  as 'a  fetish  tree.'"  (W.,  62-3.)  Compare  with  this  the 
representation  of  the  sycomore  fig-tree,  with  the  goddess  appearing  in  it,  giving 
food  and  drink  to  the  worshipper  who  has  deposited  his  offerings  under  the  tree. 
Hathor  was  specially  called  "  the  lady  of  the  sycomore,"  and  the  well-known  hero 
of  the  Xllth  dynasty  tale  was  called  "the  son  of  the  sycomore"  showing  that  the 
tree  itself  was  deified. 

41.  Red  cattle  sacrificed  for  the  hippopotamus. — "  It  is  not  uncommon  for  a  goat 
to  be  killed  as  a  direct  appeal  to  the  jok  before  hipjjopotamus  hunting.  The 
Tain  Uinka  .  .  select  a  '  red '  he-goat,  or  sheep,  because  the  hippopotamus  is 
'red.'"  (D.)  In  Egypt  red  was  the  colour  of  Set;  the  hippopotamus  was  the 
animal  of  Set  (see  the  hippopotamus  standard  weight  from  the  temple  of  Set  at 
Nubt) ;  and  red  victims  were  sacrificed  to  Set. 

42.  Animal  skulls  Jiung  tip. — "Another  shrine  .  .  .  consists  of  the  trunk  of 
a  tree,  thrust  into  the  ground  ;  the  main  branches  have  been  broken  off  short,  and 
part  of  the  vertebral  column  and  horns  of  a  goat  have  been  attached  to  them  .  .  . 
the  skull  and  backbone  were  put  upon  the  post."  (D.)  "  The  vain  ceremony 
consists  of  a  sacrifice  .  .  .  the  bullocks  are  killed  .  .  .  the  bones  of  the  sacrifice 
are  thrown  away,  but  the  horns  are  added  to  those  already  attached  to  the  rit " 
(a  post  in  front  of  the  shrine).  (D.)  The  earliest  figures  of  a  shrine  in  the  Fayum 
shew  a  bull's  skull  on  a  pole  above  it ;  and  in  the  graves  of  the  invaders  after  the 
Xllth  dynasty  dozens  of  fronts  of  skulls  and  horns,  of  ox  and  goat,  are  found, 
decorated  with  red  and  black  spots,  evidently  intended  to  hang  up. 

43.  Divination  by  objects  thrown. — "  Opele  is  an  oracle  .  .  .  always  represented 
by  eight  flat  pieces  of  wood  on  metal,  or  something  else,  strung  together  in  two 
rows  of  four  on  each  side.  The  dispositions  of  one  or  other  of  these  pieces,  when 
the  whole  ensign  is  thrown  and  made  to  spread  out  upon  the  ground,  would 
represent  at  once  a  particular  Odu."  (N.  250.)  "An  ensign  made  of  pieces  of 
ivory,  carrying  four  eyelets  each."  (N.  255.)  "The  cola-fruit  is  commonly  used 
for  divination.  It  is  commonly  split  in  halves  and  thrown  upon  the  ground,  the 
position  assumed  then  by  the  pieces,  with  faces  up  or  down,  declaring  either  good 
or  evil."     (N.  258.) 


2.     Pairs  of  Slate  Figures  used  in  Pre-iiistoric  Egypt.    Naqadeh. 


The  groups  of  slips  tied  together,  are  like  the  pairs  of  slips  of  slate,  often 
found  in  pre-historic  graves,  which  always  have  a  tying  hole  or  notches  at  one  end, 
and  which  so  tied  would  thus  lie  in  various  positions  one  to  another  when  thrown 
down.  Two  such  pairs  were  found  in  a  box,  along  with  a  pair  of  ivory  tusks 
ending  in  carved  heads,  in  a  pre-historic  grave  at  Naqadeh,  and  recognised  then  as 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


165 


being  probably  a  magician's  apparatus.  The  divination  by  the  outside  or  inside  of 
nuts  lying  up,  is  hl<e  the  modern  Egyptian  throwing  of  lots  with  slips  of  palm 
stick,  counting  the  inner  or  outer  sides  as  they  lie.  Such  was  doubtless  a  method 
in  the  1st  dynasty,  when  slips  of  ivory  were  carved,  flat  on  one  side,  and  with  the 
knots  of  a  reed^arved  on  the  convex  side  (Fig.  2). 

Material  Products. 

44.  Red  and  white  pottery. — The  modern  pottery  of  the  south  of  Algier  is 
faced  with  red  haematite,  decorated  with  white  slip,  of  the  same  fabric  and  colours 
as  the  early  pre-historic  pottery  in  Egypt.  The  geometrical  patterns  are  also 
closely  alike,  and  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the  Algerian  pottery  is  a  continuation 
of  the  same  style  as  the  earliest  decorated  pottery  of  Egypt. 

45.  Red  and  black  pottery. — "  The  women  having  procured  the  right  kind 
of  earth  break  it  up  on  a  stone  and  knead  it  with  water,  till  it  attains  the  proper 
consistency  ;  they  then  mould  a  round  lump,  make  a  hole  in  the  middle,  and  work 
away  at  it  with  their  hands  and  now  and  then  a  bamboo  splint.  No  wheel  or 
mould  is  used.  Sometimes  an  incised  pattern  is  made  while  the  clay  is  soft. 
When  finished,  the  pot  is  stood  in  the  shade  for  a  day ;  then  they  put  it  out  into 
the  sun,  and  when  dry,  burn  it  in  an  open  wood  fire  ....  Pots  are  sometimes 
coloured  red  by  mixing  oxide  of  iron  with  the  clay ;  sometimes  they  have  quite 
a  good  glaze,  and  the  red  surface  is  variegated  with  black  bands."  (W.  205.) 
This  appears  to  have  been  the  method  of  making  the  usual  pre-historic  pottery  in 
Egypt,  with  the  polished  red  haematite  facing. 

46.  Mud  toys. — "  One  sometimes  comes  on  a  little  group  of  children  quietly 
busy  and  happy  on  a  bank  of  a  stream,  and  finds  that  they  are  engaged  in  modelling 


3.    Mud  Toys  of  Mummy  in  Coffin  and  Animals.    XIIth  dynasty. 


Kahun. 
L  3 


i66 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


figures  out  of  clay.  One  does  not  see  this  art  carried  into  adult  life  ;  and  as  there 
is  no  attempt  to  make  the  results  permanent  by  burning  them,  they  are  not  often 
met  with."  (W.  117-8.)  Mud  toys  were  also  usually  made  by  Egyptian  children, 
most  of  those  preserved  are  from  the  town  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  Kahun.  Men, 
women,  and  various  animals  are  here  shewn,  and  a  model  sarcophagus  and  mummy, 
a  truly  Egyptian  toy  (Fig.  3). 

47.  Wooden  head  rests, — These  are  usual  in  Africa,  and  are  sometimes  carved, 
(W.,  144.)  The  head  rest  began  to  come  into  use  in  Egypt  in  the  Ilnd  dynasty, 
and  was  very  common  in  all  the  great  periods  of  civilisation,  of  many  different 
types,  some  elaborately  carved. 

48.  Natural  and  compound  wooden  hoe. — "  The  universal  agricultural  implement 
is  the  hoe,  which,  in  this  part  of  Africa,  has  a  short  handle,  so  that  the  person 
wielding  it  has  to  stoop,  but  also  gains  much  more  power  for  the  stroke  than  one 
has  with  a  long  handle.  The  blade  is  leaf  shaped,  rounded  to  a  blunt  point  in  front, 
and  tapering  to  a  spike  at  the  back,  which  is  driven  into  the  handle  .  .  .  wooden 
hoes  are  still  used  in  some  remote  places  among  the  hills.  They  have  very  long 
rather  narrow  blades,  set  into  the  handle  at  an  acutcr  angle  than  the  usual  iron  hoe, 
but,  like  it,  suggesting  the  origin  of  this  implement  from  the  primitive  forked 
branch,  with  one  of  the  ends  cut  short."  (VV.,  180.)  Similarly  in  Egypt  there  is 
the  natural  hoe  cut  from  a  branching  tree  (Fig.  7),  found  in  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
and  represented  in  the  hieroglyphs  (Fig.  6).     Copied  from  that  is  the  compound 


4.  Compound  Wooden 
Hoe.     XIIth  dynasty. 


5.  HiKROGLYPH  of 

Compound  Hoe. 


6.  Hieroglyph  of 
Natural  Hoe. 


7.  Natural  Hoe. 
XHth  dynasty. 


8.  Woman  and  Man  Spinning  Thread  which  has  been  hand-twisted  first, 
THE  Ball  of  Twist  being  here  in  a  Bowl  to  prevent  it  rolling  away. 
The  Woman  is  running  two  spindles,  and  stands  high  to  allow  of  a 
LONG  twist  of  THREAD.     Tomb  of  Khely,  Beni  Hasan.     XHth  dynasty. 

hoe  with  leaf-shaped  blade,  pointed  in  front,  and  with  a  spike  at  the  back  to  go 
through  a  hole  in  the  handle  (P'ig.  4)  ;  this  is  the  hoe  figured  as  the  hieroglyph 
mer  (Fig.  5). 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


167 


49.  Double  process  spinning. — "The  spinning  wheel  is  unknown,  and  the 
process  of  twisting  the  thread  by  hand,  and  then  spinning  it  on  the  njinga, 
a  wooden  spindle  with  a  whorl  or  reel  of  tortoise-shell  or  hard  wood,  is  a  very 
leisurely  one."  (W.,  195.)  At  Beni  Hasan  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  is  shewn  the 
process  of  spinl>ing  the  thread  which  has  been  already  twisted  by  hand  (Fig.  8). 
This  is  by  no  means  a  usual  process,  as  the  spinning  is  done  direct  from  the  loose 
wool  in  modern  Egypt,  as  it  also  was  in  Greece. 

50.  Flat  ground-loom.  "Three  or  four  bobbins-full  of  thread  are  used  to  '  set' 
the  loom,  which  consists  of  four  posts  driven  into  the  ground  and  connected  by 
cross  bars."  (VV.,  196.)  The  Egyptian  loom  was  likewise  flat  on  the  ground 
between  cross  bars,  fixed  to  four  pegs  driven  into  the  ground  (Fig.  9). 


/* 


9.  Flat  Ground  Loom.     Tomb  of  Khety,  Beni  Hasan.     Xllth  dynasty. 


10.  Scissor  Hand  Net.     Vth  dynasty  Tomb  of  Ptah-hotep,  Saqqareh. 


51.  Mosquito  w^-Zj.— Sleeping  nets  are  woven  of  palm  fibre;  also  "  sleepmg 
bags  used  by  the  River  natives  as  a  protection  against  mosquitoes."  (W.,  200.) 
Mosquito  nets  are  described  by  Herodotos  as  used  by  natives  of  the  Nile  Delta. 

L  4 


1 68 


Egypt  in  Africa. 


52.  Harpoon. — "  Before  going  fishing  or  hippopotamus  hunting  a  man  takes 
his  harpoons  to  the  wife  of  the  rain-maker  who  rubs  them  with  oil  made  from 
hippopotamus  fat."  They  try  to  secure  the  help  of  the  ancestral  spirit  "  in  fishing 
and  in  harpooning  hippopotami."  (D.)  The  harpoon  was  the  regular  fishing 
implement,  first  of  bone  in  the  early  pre-historic  age,  then  of  copper,  often  figured 
in  the  Old  Kingdom  fishing  scenes,  and  lastly  of  iron  in  Roman  times.  The 
Bunyoro  use  "a  harpoon  attached  to  a  long  rope  made  of  fibre.  To  this  rope 
a  float  is  tied  to  indicate  the  movements  of  the  hippopotamus  till  dead."     (K.,  112.) 

53.  Drag  net. — "  Nets  arc  anchored  with  a  couple  of  stones,  the  upper  edge 
being  kept  at  the  top  of  the  water  by  a  line  of  floats  .  .  .  sometimes  the  ropes  are 
taken  on  shore,  and  the  net  hauled  up  on  the  beach,  like  our  seines.  This  is  done 
with  the  largest  kind  of  net,  requiring  twenty  men  to  handle  it."  (W.,  193.)  This 
is  the  regular  pattern  of  Egyptian  net,  represented  in  dozens  of  tombs  of  the  Old 
Kingdom,  with  a  line  of  floats  and  a  line  of  sinkers. 

54.  Hand  net.—"  Hand  nets  are  also  used  like  shrimping  nets,  with  handles 
working  over  each  other,  scissor-wise,  but  kept  in  place  by  a  cross  bar."  (W.,  193.) 
Such  nets  are  .shewn  as  used  in  the  Vth  dynasty  (Fig.  10). 

55.  Basket  traps. — On  Lake  Nyanza  they  use  "  basket  traps  constructed  on  the 
principle  of  a  lobster  pot."      (W.,   193.)      Similar  basket  traps  were  used  in  the 


= 

m 

^ 

= 

II.  Basket  Trap  for  Fish.     VIth  dynasty. 


Vth  dynasty  (Fig.  11).     "The  Bakeni  make  huge  crates  of  thin  plaited  cane  for 
fish-traps,  in  shape  much  like  a  water-pot  with  a  very  narrow  mouth."     (K.,  213.) 

56.  Ring  snares. — "  A  favourite  snare  for  antelopes  is  in  the  shape  of  a  ring, 
made  of  twigs  and  fibre,  the  centre  being  entirely  filled  with  huge  thorns  pointing 
inwards,  leaving  only  a  small  circle  in  the  centre.  This  is  set  over  a  small  hole  in 
the  ground  ;  an  antelope  treading  on  the  ring  puts  its  foot  through,  and  is  unable 
to  withdraw  it,  owing  to  the  thorns."  (K.,  117.)  Such  a  trap  made  of  splints  of 
palm  stick  was  found  by  me  some  years  ago,  and  is  now  in  the  Anthropological 
Museum,  O.xford.  On  the  pre-historic  painted  tomb  at  Hierakonpolis  is  shown 
a  large  circular  trap  of  this  pattern,  with  four  animals  standing  around  it,  to  provide 
game  for  the  deceased  (Hierakonpolis,  LXXVI). 

57.  Cone  on  the  head. — In  the  Gan  country,  "  The  main  head  ornament  is  the 
giwich,wh\ch.  is  itself  made  of  hair  as  a  basis.  The  hair  shaved  off  from  time  to 
time  is  carefully  saved  until  sufficient  is  collected  to  form  a  sort  of  cone,  some  four 
inches  high,  and  three  in  diameter  at  the  base.  This  cone  is  usually  decorated  .  .  . 
with  strings  of  white  and  red  beads,  .  .  with  small  rings  of  brass,  .  .  the  summit .  .  . 
with  an  old  cartridge  case."  (K.,  188-9.)  This  cone  of  hair  (Fig.  12)  seems  to 
explain  the  cone  of  the  same  size  which  is  represented  on  the  head  in  the  XVIIIth 
to  the  XXth  dynasties  (F"ig.  13).  It  has  never  been  understood  hitherto  ;  but  as  it 
was  obviously  some  very  light  object  it  may  well  have  been  a  cone  of  hair  like 
the  modern  African,  though  not  bound  round  with  beads  and  metal  rings. 


Eg)'pt  in  Africa. 


169 


12.  Cone  of  Hair  worn  in  the  Gan 

Country. 
Kitching,  Backwaters  of  the  Nile,  p.  127. 


13.  Cone  worn  on  Mead  at 
Thebes.    XVIIIth  dynasty. 


Late  infltiaice  from  Egypt. 

There  appear  to  have  been  at  least  three  periods  when  influences  spread  in 
Africa  either  from,  or  through,  Egypt.  The  earlier  is  under  the  strong  power  of  the 
XXVth  dynasty  at  Napata ;  this  kingdom  borrowed  its  writing  and  much  of  its 
culture  from  Egypt,  and  spread  it  to  outlying  regions  of  its  rule.  This,  however,  did 
not  apparently  spread  as  far  as  the  Equator  or  Niger. 

The  great  activities  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  spread  as  far  as  the  Niger,  as  is 
shown  by 

58.  Terracotta  Nigerian  heads. — ^These  are  illustrated  in  our  second  part  (p.  85); 
the  style  of  art  and  the  solid  modelling  (not  hollow  moulding)  stamp  these  as  of  the 
same  school  as  the  best  modelled  heads  found  at  Memphis,  of  the  Persian  age. 
They  cannot  have  been  derived  from  the  much  rougher  hollow  moulded  figures  of 
Ptolemaic  or  Roman  work.  The  style  is  admirable,  and  could  not  be  surpassed  for 
a  racial  portrait,  identical  with  the  present  type  of  the  people. 

The  later  influence  of  the  Greek  world  is  seen  in 

59.  The  classical  patterns  still  used  on  the  Niger,  copied  from  the  Greek 
vine  scroll,  egg  and  dart,  and  other  border  designs.  (See  Frobenius,  Voice  of 
Africa,  II,  464.) 

The  next  great  wave  of  influence  was  due  to  the  spread  of  Christianity, 
especially  under  the  pious  sway  of  Justinian.     This  is  seen  perpetuated  in  No.  60. 

60.  Interwoven  patterns. — These  are  found  at  Benin  and  other  Nigerian  centres. 
This  style  was  originally  belonging  to  the  nomads  of  Central  Asia,  who  developed 
osier  work  for  their  tent  life  (see  the  interior  of  a  Kirghiz  tent  in  Skrine  and  Ross, 
Heart  of  Asia,  183).  It  was  brought  into  Roman  mosaics  of  the  second  century, 
probably  by  the  Dacian  and  northern  captives.  It  did  not,  however,  affect 
architecture  till  the  northern  influence  on  Constantinople,  where  the  interwoven 
basket  capital  started  ;  and  the  interwoven  marble  screens  in  Italy  do  not  appear 
till  the  Gothic  occupation.  By  the  time  of  Justinian  this  style  was  fixed  in  Roman 
art ;  and  it  must  be  in  that  age,  before  the  crushing  Arab  conquests,  that  this  style 
was  spread  so  strongly  in  Egypt  and  onward  to  the  Niger. 


170  Egypt  in  Africa. 

6i.  Architectural  style. — "  The  Songhai  seem  to  have  adopted  an  imitation  of 
ancient  Egyptian  architecture  in  clay  and  wood  instead  of  stone.  They  in  their 
turn  subdued  the  Mandingos  ....  in  the  city  of  Jenne,  at  the  confluence  of  the 
Niger  and  the  Bani.  From  Jenne  was  radiated  over  all  the  Western  Sudan 
a  diluted  Egyptian  influence  in  architectural  forms,  in  boat  building,  and  other 
arts."  (J.,  lo.)  It  may  perhaps  be  more  accurate  to  state  that  the  Songhai  have 
continued  the  Egyptian  style  of  brick  and  woodwork,  which  has  been  best  preserved 
to  us  by  the  architectural  copies  in  stone.  The  genera!  unity  of  style  in  building 
from  Upper  Egypt  across  North  Africa  is  very  marked. 

In  this  connection  it  might  be  expected  that  the  arguments  in  a  paper  on  the 
African  origin  of  the  Egyptian  civilisation,  in  the  Revue  ArchMogique  (191 3,  n, 
47-65)  should  be  introduced.  I  regret  that  I  cannot  accept  the  statements  there 
brought  forward. 

After  having  shown  how  much  of  general  African  ideas  and  culture  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  Egyptian  civilisation,  and  how  in  a  few  cases  Egypt  has  influenced 
Africa,  it  is  needful  to  say  that  this  by  no  means  covers  the  whole  culture.  There 
was  a  large  influence  from  Syria  in  the  second  pre-historic  civilisation.  Another, 
and  most  potent,  influence  was  that  at  the  founding  of  the  dynasties,  apparently 
originating  from  Elam,  to  judge  by  different  connections,  especially  the  style  of 
some  cylinder  seals.  A  third  great  influence  in  the  first  dynasty,  and  all  later  ages, 
was  the  Mediterranean  culture,  from  Crete,  and  later  from  Hellas.  These  other 
sources  made  Egypt  what  it  became,  although  we  can  see  the  African  substrata 
strongly,  especially  in  the  early  periods. 

VV.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


(     i/r     ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology.  Vol.  VI.  170  pp., 
34  plates.  Vol.  VII,  parts  i,  2.  lOi".  yearly.  University 
Press,  Liverpool. 

(As  one  volume,  and  half  of  another,  have  been  issued  within  twelve  months,  it 
will  be  most  suitable  to  take  the  whole  contents  in  historical  order.) 

SeligMANN,  C.  G. — Ethnic  relationship  of  the  Vanquished  represented  on 
certain  Proto-dynastic  Egyptian  Palettes  (VII,  43-9).  This  is  a  discussion  of  the 
lower  part  of  a  palette  in  the  British  Museum,  with  carvings  of  lions  and  vultures 
devouring  the  slain.  The  vanquished  people  have  (i)  curly  or  frizzly  hair; 
(ii)  a  chin  tuft,  sometimes  plaited,  and  narrow  whiskers ;  (iii)  noses  which  are  thick, 
but  not  snubby  ;  (iv)  thick  lips  :  (v)  peculiar  circumcision.  From  these  points  it  is 
concluded  that  they  were  a  mixture  of  negro  and  Beja  tribes  of  the  eastern  desert ; 
such  people,  apart  from  the  negro  element,  may  well  have  been  like  the  pre-dynastic 
Egyptians,  and  the  plaiting  of  the  beard  is  seen  also  in  the  figures  of  Egyptian  gods 
and  kings.  On  the  Narmer  palette  the  two  running  figures,  and  the  man  trampled 
on  by  a  bull,  are  of  this  same  type,  specially  indicated  by  the  circumcision,  but 
differing  by  the  hair  not  being  frizzly.  Dr.  Seligmann  claims  all  the  plaited-beard 
people,  whether  north  or  south,  as  being  kin  to  the  pre-historic  Egyptians,  mixed 
with  negroes  in  the  south,  and  perhaps  with  other  races  in  the  north  ;  the  resemblance 
however,  shewn  below  seems  hardly  close  enough. 


I.  Type  with  PLAirEU  Bkard  and 
Curly  Hair.     Slate  paleite.   . 


2.  Type  of  Captivks  of  Nar-mer. 


172  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 

WainWRIGHT,  G.  a.— The  Keftiu-people  of  the  Egyptian  Monuments  (VI, 
24-83).  The  main  feature  of  this  long  paper  is  the  complete  collection  of  all 
the  lesser  points  of  evidence,  discriminating  the  different  peoples  concerned,  and 
granting  that  the  Egyptians  were  not  merely  drawing  haphazard  but  observing 
details.  It  is  fairly  shown  that  any  confusion  in  the  matter  lies  in  the  lazy  and 
careless  observation  of  ihe  modern  and  not  in  that  of  the  ancient.  The  land  of 
Keftiu  has  been  variously  supposed  to  be  l^hoenicia,  from  the  Ptolemaic  rendering ; 
or  Crete,  from  a  supposed  identity  of  Caphtor  with  each  land ;  or  Cyprus,  from 
vague  grounds  of  position.  Max  Miiller's  identification  of  Keftiu  with  the  eastern 
part  of  Cilicia  is  that  which  is  strongly  supported  by  the  results  of  this  paper. 

The  method  here  followed  is  by  analysing  the  mass  of  material  into  as  many 
definite  items  as  possible,  and  then  statistically  saying  what  proportion  of  these 
items  are  found  in  other  situations.  The  various  items  are  set  out  in  plates 
separately  one  by  one,  so  that  each  issue  can  be  judged  clearly.  This  is  the  only 
way  of  dealing  with  a  mass  of  detail,  which  otherwise  slips  over  the  mind  leaving 
a  vague  impression.  Thus  it  is  shown  that  the  foreigners  in  the  tomb  of  Rekhmara, 
who  are  definitely  called  Keftiu,  bring  59  objects ;  of  these  38  are  Syrian,  5  are 
known  to  be  non-Syrian,  while  16  are  peculiar,  and  suffice  to  show  that  Keftiu  is  in 
some  way  different  from  Syria. 

The  grouping  of  the  various  countries  in  Egyptian  records  shows  that  Keftiu 
goes  with  the  northern  and  western  Asiatics.  The  order  is  given  as, — the  west 
land,  Keftiu,  and  Asy  (Orontes)  ;  Naharin,  Keftiu,  and  Mannus  (Mallos,  Cilicia) ; 
Tunip,  Ikariti,  Keftiu  . .  .  Tikhsi,  Naharain  (i.e.,  between  Syrian  and  Mesopotamian 
places);  Naharain,  Sangara,  Kheta,  Keftiu,  Asy.  These  point  to  the  north  of 
Syria.  That  Cilician  was  regarded  as  Syrian  is  shown  both  by  Sennacherib  and 
Herodotos ;  and  the  natural  boundary  is  the  great  Taurus  range  and  the  plateau 
north  of  it,  rather  than  a  bend  in  the  coast  line.  Eastern  Cilicia  is  therefore 
indicated  as  Keftiu. 

The  question  of  the  People  of  the  Isles  is  next  considered.  Their  name 
immediately  follows  that  of  Keftiu  in  Rekhmara  ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
them  synonymous.  On  the  contrary,  the  two  names  are  never  conjoined  elsewhere ; 
they  seem  here  to  be  those  of  two  different  people,  stated  side  by  side. 

By  a  process  of  systematic  elimination  the  products  of  each  region  are  cleared 
one  from  another;  these  are  collected  from  the  tomb-paintings  of  Rekhmara, 
Men-kheper-ra-senb,  Amenemheb,  and  Senmut.  The  objects  belonging  to  the 
People  of  the  Isles  are  then  compared  with  those  figured  in  Crete,  and  shown  to  be 
similar.  The  types  of  dagger  and  sword  depend  upon  the  marking  of  the  mid-rib  ; 
those  of  Crete  have  a  mid-rib,  like  those  of  the  People  of  the  Isles  and  the 
pre-historic  Egyptian  ;  while  those  of  the  Keftiu  and  the  Hyksos  have  only  a  wide 
thickening  of  the  blade  in  the  middle,  such  as  is  seen  on  the  Egyptian  daggers  of 
the  XIII-XVI  dynasties.  The  ribbed  dagger  has  a  pointed  end;  the  flat-faced 
dagger  has  a  round  end  ;  the  one  is  for  thrusting  as  a  rapier,  the  other  for  cutting 
as  a  knife. 

The  form  of  waist  cloth  differs  between  Crete  and  Keftiu  ;  the  Cretan  is  very 
short,  with  a  loose  flap  behind  ;  the  Keftiuan  comes  over  the  whole  thigh,  and  has 
a  point  hanging  down  between  the  knees ;  the  style  of  decoration  is  also  quite 
different. 

The  sorting  of  all  the  material  results  in  there  being  87  objects  which  are  purely 
Keftiuan  ;  of  these,  60  have  analogies  to  Syrian  objects,  7  are  non-Aegean  from 
Rekhmara,  and  20  arc  dissimilar  to  objects  of  other  lands.     The  latter  show  that 


Afinals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology.  173 

we  are  not  dealing  with  general  Syrian  products.  The  various  objects  are  all 
discussed  in  detail,  showing  what  comparisons  may  be  brought  forward.  Among 
these  we  may  note  that  copper  and  silver  were  both  brought  by  Keftiu  people 
in  ingots,  and  Iherefore  produced  in  the  country.  This  definitely  cuts  off  the 
Cretan  suggestion,  and  the  silver  also  bars  the  possibility  of  Cyprus,  and  shows  that 
Keftiu  touched  the  Taurus  range.  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  both  refer  to  silver  coming 
from  Tarshish  (Tarsos).  Another  distinction  is  that  gold  is  shown  in  the  Syrian 
tribute,  but  not  among  the  produce  of  Keftiu. 

Regarding  the  meaning  of  Caphtor,  no  very  certain  conclusion  is  reached,  after 
reviewing  all  the  opinions.  More  probably  Keftiu  and  Caplitor  are  identical,  but 
neither  of  them  can  be  Crete.     The  Septuagint  translates  Caphtor  by  Cappadocia. 

In  an  appendix  various  resemblances  are  stated  between  the  civilisations  of 
Syria  and  the  Crete-Aegean  area.  These  not  only  show  that  the  Cretan  and 
Keftiuan  resemblances  are  parts  of  a  larger  whole  ;  but,  much  more,  they  show  how 
the  culture  of  the  North-eastern  Mediterranean  was  a  single  group,  with  mere 
variations  locally.  This  is  highly  probable,  as  the  area  is  not  larger  than  the  Italic 
area  bounded  by  Greece  and  Sardinia,  or  the  Spanish  area  from  Sardinia  westward. 
This  paper  is  perhaps  even  more  important  for  its  method,  and  bearing  on  future 
work,  than  for  its  immediate  conclusions. 

WOOLLEV,  C.  L. — Hittite  Burial  Customs  (VI,  87-98).  For  the  first  time  we 
come  into  close  contact  with  the  Hittites,  by  the  objects  of  daily  life  recovered  from 
their  graves.  These  have  been  studied  not  only  in  the  excavations  of  the  British 
Museum  at  Carchemish,  but  also  by  keeping  in  touch  with  the  large  produce  of  the 
excavations  of  the  Bagdad  railway  and  the  plunderings  by  natives.  The  periods 
distinguished  are  as  follows  : — 

I.  Neolithic.     Carchemish,  Yunus. 

Bronze   Age. 

II.  Champagne-glass  tombs,  Carchemish,  &c. 

III.  Early  Hittite?,  before  1750  B.C.,  Hammam. 

IV.  Middle  Hittite,  1750-1100  B.C.,  Amarna,  &c. 

Iron   Age. 

V.  Late  Hittite     I   1100-7 18  B.C.I  Yunus. 

„  „        II     718-605  B.C.J  Carchemish,  &c. 

VI.  Persian,  605  to  4th  century  B.C. 

I.  Pre-historic.  The  burials  are  contracted,  and  seated  upright  like  Libyan 
burials.  They  are  in  large  pottery  vases,  placed  below  the  floors  of  neolithic  rooms, 
which  are  strewn  with  flint  and  obsidian  tools,  and  hand-made  pottery. 

II.  Early  Bronze.  Cists  of  stone  about  8x3  feet,  are  in  connection  with  mud- 
brick  houses.  The  body  is  contracted,  with  bronze  weapons  and  ornaments,  and 
much  wheel-made  pottery,  among  which  is  what  is  called  the  "  champagne-glass 
pot,"  which  is  almost  the  same  as  the  tall  stemmed  incense  burner  before  the  Middle 
Kingdom.  Whether  this  is  truly  a  bronze  period,  or  whether  it  is  of  copper,  is  not 
stated.  This  period  overlapped  the  last,  burials  of  both  styles  occurring  together. 
The  toggle  pin,  with  an  eyelet  a  third  of  the  way  down  it,  occurs  in  this  period,  and 
this  is  known  at  Gurob  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  as  far  east  as  Nippur. 


174  Auuals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 

III-IV.  Early  and  Middle  Hittite.  These  burials  are  like  tlje  previous,  except 
that  they  are  in  cemeteries,  and  not  under  houses.  Early  Sumerian  cylinders  are 
found  in  these  burials  of  period  III.  Plenty  of  toggle  pins  are  found,  but  otherwise 
nothing  in  touch  with  Egyptian  types.  The  pottery  is  quite  clear  of  such  connection, 
and  none  of  it  could  be  dated  from  Egypt.  The  daggers  are  all  smooth  bladed, 
without  any  mid-rib.  From  the  Sumerian  cylinders  this  bronze  age  must  begin  far 
before  the  Hittite  migration,  which  came  into  Mesopotania  about  1750  B.C.  The 
Hittites  must  therefore  have  come  in  during  the  Bronze  Age.  It  is  supposed 
that  they  were  a  military  caste,  small  in  numbers,  which  did  not  largely  alter  the 
general  culture. 

On  reaching  the  Iron  Age,  cremation  in  urn  burials  is  found,  with  bronze 
fibulae  of  Cypro-Asiatic  type,  and  imported  Greek  and  Cypriote  pottery.  The  rude 
"snow-man"  figures  of  clay  are  found,  and  as  such  are  common  in  Egypt  about 
1100-700  B.C.,  the  dating  exactly  agrees;  probably  the  source  of  them  there  is 
Asiatic,  especially  at  Tell  el-Yehudiyeh.  At  that  place  also  were  found  ribbed 
bronze  fibulae,  like  those  of  the  Hittite  graves.  {Hyksos  and  Israelite  Cities,  XXa, 
grave  321.)  Most  of  the  precise  detail  of  the  Carchemish  grave's  is  reserved  for  the 
final  publication  by  the  British  Museum. 

GaRSTANG,  J. —  The  Sun-god\dess'\  of  Arenna  (VI,  109-118).  This  is 
a  discussion  of  the  well-known  description  of  the  official  seals  of  the  Hittites,  as 
stated  in  the  Egyptian  treaty.  A  difficulty  in  understanding  it  has  been  in  the 
sun  deity  being  stated  to  be  feminine.  This  has,  however,  been  found  also  on 
a  tablet  from  Boghaz-Keui ;  as  parallels  there  may  be  mentioned  the  Semitic 
Shemash  and  the  teutonic  Sonne,  both  feminine.  It  might  be  an  important  clue 
to  some  ethnography  to  classify  all  people  by  the  sex  attributed  to  sun  and  moon, 
as  it  is  a  very  primitive  idea.  The  broad  result  is  that  the  queen  was  heiress  of 
Arenna,  and  high-priestess  of  the  Sun-goddess  there  ;  while  similarly  the  Hittite 
king  was  high-priest  of  the  Sun-god  at  Boghaz-Keui.  In  each  case  a  minor 
fellow-deity  was  associated  ;  the  male  Teshub  with  the  Ishtar  of  Arenna,  and 
Ishtar-Kybele  with  the  Teshub-Hadad  of  the  Hittites.  The  position  of  Arenna, 
as  capital  of  Kizawaden,  is  next  considered.  The  indications  are  that  Kizawaden 
is  Kataonia,  as  stated  in  Studetifs  History,  III,  68  ;  Arenna,  however,  is  not  placed 
at  Arana  (39°  5'  N.,  37°  35'  E.)  but  at  Comana  (37°  58'  N.,  36°  12'  E.).  The 
ground  for  this  is  that  in  the  fifth  year  of  Tiglath-Pileser  the  mountaineers  of 
Kumani  retreated  upon  "  the  fortress  of  Arini  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Aise."  The 
proposed  connection  entirely  depends  on  the  resemblance  of  the  name  of  Arenna 
to  Arini,  while  it  is  at  least  quite  as  much  like  the  name  Arana.  That  the  people 
of  Kumani  retreated  to  Arini  is  not  at  all  a  reason  for  identifying  Kumani- 
Comana  with  Arini,  rather  the  opposite.  There  does  not  seem  therefore  any 
ground  for  this  proposal  of  Comana  being  the  ancient  capital  of  Kizawadana.  The 
occurrence  of  a  radiated  goddess  on  the  coins  of  Comana  in  Roman  times  is  not 
enough  to  prove  that  Comana  must  be  the  same  as  any  city  which  worshipped 
a  Sun-goddess  long  before. 

Lehmann-Haupt,  C.  F. — Note  on  the  Linen  Girdle  of  Ranieses  III  (WW,  50). 
From  previous  description  it  is  concluded  that  this  girdle  was  not  loom-woven, 
"  but  is  a  product  of  the  old  technique  of  weaving  with  cards  or  small  wooden 
boards  "  ;  this  statement  is  made  in  advance  of  any  examination  of  the  girdle, 
although  such  only  involves  going  from  Liverpool  to  Manchester. 


Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 


175 


Garstang,  J. ;  George,  W.  S.  ;  Phythian-Adams,  W.  J. ;  Savce,  A.  H. — 
Interim  Reports  on  Excavation  at  Meroe  (VI,  I-21  ;  VII,  1-24).  The  general 
outline  of  Meroitic  remains  is  summarised  in  a  table,  which  may  be  abbreviated  as 
follows : — • 

Early  Meroitic  :  650-400  (?)  b.c. 

Foundation  of  palace  of  Aspelut,  Hor-ma-ti-leq,  etc. 

Earlier  Sun  temple  of  Aspelut. 

Original  temple  of  Isis. 

Original  temple  of  Amon,  probable. 

(^Interval  of  probably  a  century.) 

Middle  Meroitic  :  300-0  b.c. 

I.  300-150  B.C.     Ergamenes. 
Great  stone  walls  of  city. 
Foundations  of  later  temple  of  Amen. 
Burial  by  inhumation  at  necropolis,  by  cremation  near  city. 

150-0  B.C.     Neteg-Amon. 
Royal  palace  and  avenue. 

Many  buildings  of  red  bricks,  crematorium  in  city. 
Baths  and  observatory. 
Sun  temple  ;  Isis  temple. 
Osiris  shrine  and  two  great  steles. 

Late  Meroitic:  a.d.  0-350. 

Restoration  of  baths,  with  Roman  motives. 
Palaces  and  temples. 
Restoration  of  Amen  temple. 


II. 


Period  of  decline,  desertion  and  destruction. 
Overthrow  by  Axumites,  A.D.  340. 
Final  destruction  about  A.D.  700. 

The  result  of  the  last  season's  work  has  been  to  complete  the  clearance  of  the 
whole  of  the  northern  half  of  the  city,  a  space  of  about  100  x  200  yards,  the  earth 
being  removed  to  outside  of  the  area  by  wire  rope  and  trolleys.  For  comparison 
of  size  we  may  say  that  the  Egyptian  town  of  Kahun  is  six  times  this  area,  or  the 
Palace  of  Apries  at  Memphis  is  about  half  this  area.  The  finest  period  of  work  is 
stated  to  be  the  middle  period  of  about  1 50  B.C.  The  main  entrance  to  the  city  on 
the  north  led  up  a  wide  street,  with  half  a  dozen  trees  on  each  side,  which  ran 
along  the  side  of  the  palace  to  the  middle  of  the  city.  At  the  other  side  of  the 
palace  is  a  building  for  a  cremation  cemetery  and  a  crematorium.  "  Nearly  every 
chamber  enclosed  numerous  vases,  for  the  most  part  below  the  floor  level.  These 
were  uniformly  inverted,  and  generally  contained  ashes  and  bones  in  a  more  or 
less  incinerated  state."  Other  chambers  in  the  palace  also  had  similar  burials. 
The  vases  correspond  in  form  and  decoration  with  those  of  the  Ptolemaic  cemeterj' 
at  Alexandria.     This  change  of  burial  custom  is  attributed  to  Hellenistic  influence. 

A  matter  which  might  prove  of  great  interest  is  a  room  supposed  to  be  an 
observatory.  The  evidence  for  this  lies  in  two  stone  piers,  one  square,  one 
octagonal,  and  graffiti  on  the  wall,  shewing  a  man  with  a  circle  and  lines  proceeding 
from  it,  suppo.sed  to  represent  a  transit  instrument.     The  great  difficulty  about 


176  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 

any  astronomical  idea  connected  with  this  place  is  that  it  is  not  oriented,  but  has 
its  axis  about  33°  E.  of  N.  This  direction  is  not  laid  out  for  any  special  purpose, 
but  is  merely  that  of  all  the  buildings  of  the  earlier  direction,  across  the  whole 
city.  It  seems  impossible  to  suppose  that  any  observations  could  be  intended  in 
a  place  where  the  meridian  was  disregarded.  Any  transit  instrument  would  have 
to  be  set  up  entirely  askew  to  the  pedestals  and  the  room.  A  tally  of  strokes  on 
the  wall  of  the  chamber  consists  of  9  strokes,  and  then  8  +  «  strokes  ;  a  horizontal 
line  then  runs  across ;  below  that  are  two  columns  of  strokes,  one  has  15+IS+15  +  5, 
the  other  has  15  +  15  +  15  +  10,  or  50  and  55  strokes.  These  are  here  compared 
with  a  statement  that  at  Ptolemais  on  the  Red  Sea,  nearly  in  the  latitude  of  Meroe, 
an  interval  of  45  days  elapseJ  between  the  summer  solstice  and  the  two  dates 
(before  and  after)  whereon  the  shadows  of  the  sun  were  vertical  at  noon.  Now  the 
latitude  of  Meroe  is  stated  as  16°  56'  18"  N.,  and  a  brief  reference  to  Whitaker's 
Almanac  shews  that  the  sun  is  at  that  declination  on  May  8  and  on  August  6, 
90  days  apart.  Therefore  if  this  tally  shewed  the  number  of  days  when  the  sun 
was  north  of  the  vertical  at  noon,  it  should  be  45  in  number,  and  not  50  and  55. 
To  agree  with  these  numbers  the  vertical  miist  have  been  fixed  2°  in  error,  which 
is  very  unlikely.  The  change  in  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  would  not  make  a  single 
day  of  difference  since  that  period.  The  numbers  therefore  will  not  correspond  to 
any  such  observation.  On  the  square  pedestal  converging  lines  are  drawn,  14°  on 
either  side  of  a  quasi-vertical  line,  which  leans  3^°  to  the  north.  The  sloping  lines 
point  therefore  at  the  upper  ends  17°  N.  and  11°  S.  of  the  vertical.  This  angle  of 
17°  N.  is  said  to  correspond  with  the  latitude  ;  but  there  is  no  sense  in  this 
equality,  as  it  points  to  nothing  in  particular.  If  it  pointed  to  the  south  it  would 
be  in  the  equatorial  plane,  were  it  set  in  the  meridian.  Here  the  skewness  of  the 
whole  chamber  to  the  meridian  again  prevents  its  being  possible  to  recognise  any 
astronomical  meaning.  The  graffiti,  which  are  stated  to  represent  a  "  transit 
instrument,"  look  more  like  a  plan  of  part  of  the  city  street ;  and  the  Azimuth 
instrument  suggests  a  mason's  square.  It  would  be  fascinating  if  we  could 
identify  the  means  of  observation,  but  there  seems  nothing  here  to  prove  it. 

At  2  or  3  kilometres  from  the  city  a  shrine  of  Osiris  was  found,  which  was  the 
main  discovery  of  the  season.  It  contained  two  great  steles  of  sandstone,  with 
long  inscriptions  in  cursive  Meroitic,  placed  one  on  each  side  of  a  shrine,  facing 
west.  A  copy  of  the  larger  stele  is  given,  with  an  index  of  all  the  words  in  it,  and 
a  transliteration.  Though  very  little  is  yet  known  of  the  language  of  this  script, 
Prof.  Sayce  has  made  a  first  study  of  the  stele,  identifying  the  proper  names,  and 
the  subject.  It  was  erected  by  Queen  Amon-renas  and  Agini-rherhe,  hereditary 
king  of  Roman  Kush,  and  of  the  Egyptian  frontier  and  the  land  of  Etbai, 
hereditary  prince  of  the  Romans  in  Kush.  These  rulers  are  also  known  at 
Dakkeh,  and  in  previous  inscriptions  at  Meroe.  The  style  of  writing  is  later  than 
that  of  Queen  Amon-shaghet,  whose  jewellery — now  in  Berlin — shews  her  to  have 
lived  in  the  later  Ptolemaic  age.  The  present  stele  is  therefore  probably  of  early 
Roman  age.  The  captives  of  the  king  were  offered  to  serve  Apis  of  Biggeh  and 
Osiris.  Thb  second  stele  refers  to  the  same  war,  naming  victories  at  Aswan.  This 
is  probably  the  Ethiopian  version  of  the  war  with  Petronius,  24-22  B.C.  Amen- 
hetep  III  is  stated  to  have  founded  the  kingdom  of  Meroe. 

In  the  previous  year  the  main  result  was  the  clearance  of  the  great  baths ;  the 
square  swimming  bath  was  21  x  23  feet.  There  had  been  several  alterations  and 
re-constructions,  which  obscure  the  history  of  the  building.  The  fragments  of 
a  column  suggest  that  a  shower-bath,  some   20   feet   high,   was  arranged.     The 


Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology.  177 

great  mass  of  detail  in  the  excavation  of  this  Ethiopian  capital  cannot  be  usefully 
mentioned  in  a  summary,  so  that  only  those  points  which  are  of  independent 
interest  can  be  here  noticed.  The  brief  yearly  reports  give  an  excellent  view  of 
the  results,  which  will  probably  appear  at  some  future  time  in  the  much  less 
accessible  form  .^of  a  great  work,  such  as  the  repute  of  the  Ethiopian  capital 
demands. 

Milne,  J.  G. —  The  Currency  of  Egypt  under  the  Romans  to  the  Tune  of  Diocletian 
(VII,  51-66).  Egypt  had  its  own  native  coinage  of  silver  and  copper  for  the 
first  three  centuries  of  Roman  dominion.  The  base  silver  became  steadily  worse ; 
at  first  the  tetradrachm,  which  had  been  equal  to  y.  weight  at  the  time  of 
Alexander,  started  under  Tiberius  as  half  silver,  and  was  only  credited  as  being 
equal  to  the  denarius  or  Zd. ;  from  that  it  steadily  ran  down  through  more  and 
more  alloy,  and  tin  facing,  until  it  was  nothing  but  a  little  barefaced  dump  of  copper 
worth  only  about  a  five-hundredth  of  the  original  tetradrachm.  Gold  was  not 
coined  after  the  Ptolemies,  and  Roman  aurei  are  rarely  found  except  in  a  few 
hoards  of  treasure.  Mr.  Milne  follows  the  usual  course  in  writing  of  "bronze" 
coinage  of  Rome  ;  but  the  Imperial  copper  was  always  alloyed  more  with  zinc  than 
with  tin,  and  in  some  coins  almost  entirely  with  zinc,  so  that  the  old  term,  such  as 
"  first  brass,"  is  the  more  correct.  The  sizes  of  nearly  500  of  the  copper  coins  are 
tabulated,  and  shewn  to  fall  into  five  classes,  the  largest  of  which  are  i^  inches 
across.  The  weights  of  samples  of  these  are  taken  ;  and  on  the  ground  that  the 
largest  coin  is  likely  to  be  the  largest  amount  of  copper  named  in  accounts,  it  is 
supposed  to  be  equal  to  the  drachma  of  silver.  As  this  largest  coin  averages 
360  grains,  it  follows  that  the  base  silver  tetradrachm  would  be  equal  to  1440  grains 
or  the  deben  weight,  which  Poole  shewed  was  the  original  basis  of  the  Ptolemaic 
currency.  As  silver  was  to  copper  as  120  to  i  in  value  (GreNFELL,  Revenue 
Laws),  it  would  follow  that  the  ba.se  tetradrachm  would  be  counted  as  only 
containing  12  grains  of  silver.  This  would  be  an  absurd  result,  during  the  earlier 
empire.  Working  the  matter  from  the  known  facts,  the  weight  of  1440  grains  of 
copper,  at  120  to  i,  equalled  12  grains  of  silver  or  quarter  of  a  denarius,  and  the 
denarius  was  reckoned  as  equal  to  the  base  tetradrachm.  The  base  drachma  was 
therefore  equal  to  the  deben  of  copper ;  and  the  quarter  deben,  the  largest  coin 
struck,  was  equal  in  value  to  J  of  a  base  drachma  or  i  i  obols.  If  the  ratio  of  silver 
to  copper  value  were  90  to  l  the  coin  would  be  of  2  obols  ;  or  if  it  be  higher  than 
120  to  I,  then  the  copper  coin  was  worth  even  less  than  \  drachma.  Mr.  Milne 
quotes  silver  values  of  350,  450,  and  500  times  the  weight  of  copper ;  but  these  are 
.so  high  that  we  must  suppose  that  complications  of  base  currency  somehow  come 
in.  In  modern  times,  before  depreciation  of  silver,  the  proportion  was  80  to  i,  at 
present  it  is  only  35  to  i. 

The  weights  of  the  five  classes  are  about  360,  201,  133,  75  and  26  grains.  If 
on  the  ratio  above  we  count  the  largest  as  equal  to  I  i  or  possibly  2  obols,  then  the 
others  might  be  i  obol,  5,  3  and  i  chalci. 

It  is  remarkable  how  long  the  Ptolemaic  tctradrachms  continued  in  use;  one 
document  is  quoted,  of  A.D.  227,  stating  that  a  loan  was  in  the  old  silver  coins. 
This  seems,  at  first,  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  axiom  that  "  bad  money  drives  out 
good,"  which  is  true  when  both  pass  for  equal  values.  That  the  Ptolemaic  coins 
had  not  been  driven  out,  shews  that  all  the  depreciations  that  had  taken  place  had 
always  been  so  quickly  discounted  in  the  accepted  values,  that  there  had  never 
been  a  false  value  current  long  enough  to  drive  out  the  old  coin. 

M 


1 78  Journal  of  the  Manchester  Egyptian  and  Oriental  Society. 

For  a  table  shewing  the  fluctuations  of  the  minting  in  Egypt  we  are  indebted 
to  Mr.  Milne  in  "  Historical  Studies."  A  curious  feature  is  the  long  spells  often  to 
twenty  years  during  which  the  mint  seems  to  have  been  almost  disbanded,  under 
Domitian,  Aurelius,  and  Severus. 

Other  papers  hardly  touch  Egyptian  interests,  such  as  Prof.  Seligmann's 
account  of  the  Magico-religious  aspect  of  iron  working  in  Southern  Kordofan. 
A  Greek  inscription  of  lists  of  high  priests  of  Poseidon  at  Halikarnassos,  shews 
long  family  descents  of  two  lines,  with  the  length  of  each  priesthood,  the  result 
giving  nine  generations  in  352  years;  altogether  489  years  are  recorded,  ending 
certainly  before  A.D.  43,  and  therefore  beginning  before  447  B.C.  The  notes 
unfortunately  do  not  give  any  analysis  of  this  interesting  document.  Some 
excavations  in  Honduras  are  recorded  ;  and  Mr.  Mond  gives  accounts  of  a  practical 
wire-rope  line  for  moving  earth  in  excavations  at  Meroe. 


The  Journal  of  the  Manchester  Egyptian  and  Oriental 
Society,    191 2-13.     8vo,  78  pp.     55.     (Manchester  University.) 

Besides  the  reports  of  meetings  of  the  Society  there  are  some  special  articles  on 
Egypt  which  deserve  notice. 

Hall,  H.  R. — The  Land  of  Alashiya.  The  incised  black  ware  vases,  with 
narrow  neck  and  handle,  found  in  burials  of  the  Xllth-XVIIIth  dynasties,  are 
decidedly  assigned  to  a  Syrian  source,  whence  they  were  exported  to  Cyprus  and 
Egypt.  The  land  of  Asi  has  been  supposed  to  be  Cyprus,  but  the  products  of  the 
mainland  coming  from  it  show  that  it  must  have  been  in  the  south  of  Asia  Minor, 
as  it  is  coupled  with  Keftiu  (Mr.  Wainwright  has  since  shewn  that  Asi  is  the 
modern  Nahr  el  Asy,  the  Greek  Axios  or  Orontes).  It  may  be  that  Cyprus  is 
Tinay  or  Antinay  which  once  sent  tribute,  like  the  Assyrian  name  Yatnan,  which 
was  certainly  Cyprus.  After  reviewing  many  foreign  objects  Mr.  Hall  concludes 
that  there  is  nothing  distinctly  Cypriote  in  Egypt.  The  references  in  the  Tell 
Amarna  letters  do  not  favour  Alashiya  being  Cyprus.  Mr.  Hall  prefers  to  see 
Alashiya  on  the  mainland,  between  the  Khatti  and  Syria.  The  use  of  cuneiform 
would  agree  with  this  position,  yet  after  all  he  does  not  decide  finally  against 
Alashiya  being  Cyprus. 

A  study  of  the  geography  of  the  Assyrian  Kummukh,  the  Greek  Commagene, 
and  Tigleth  Pileser's  conquest,  by  Mr.  King,  does  not  touch  on  Egypt. 

Gardiner,  Alan  H. — A  Political  Crime  in  Ancient  Egypt.  A  further 
instalment  of  the  letters  concerning  Pai-onkh  has  come  to  light  at  Berlin.  This 
son  of  the  first  priest-king,  Herhor,  is  the  main  person  in  the  Correspondence  du 
temps  des  rois-prctrcs,  published  by  Spiegelberg,  a  series  of  letters  which  has  been 
widely  scattered  by  the  chances  of  digging  and  dealing.  The  three  letters  here 
were  all  rolled  together,  put  in  a  wrapper,  and  sealed  up  as  done  with.  The  first 
correspondent,  whom  we  will  call  A,  was  the  scribe  of  the  necropolis,  Zaroi.  The 
second,  B,  was  the  bailiff  of  Pai-onkh  at  Thebes,  called  Pai-shu-uben.  The  third, 
C,  was  no  less  a  person  than  the  queen-mother,  Nezemt.  The  main  part  of  all 
three  letters  is  the  same,  an  order  to  take  two  mazoi — constables — who  had  been 


sphinx,   191 3.  179 

blabbing,  and  have  them  brought  to  Pai-onkh's  house,  and  "  put  a  stop  to  their 
words  altogether.  If  they  (A  and  B)  perceive  that  it  is  true,  they  shall  put  them  in 
two  sacks,  and  throw  them  into  the  water  by  night,  without  letting  anyone  in  the 
land  know  about  it."  The  slight  variations  in  the  letters  shew  that  B  was  to  do 
the  crime,  A  walto  see  it  was  done,  and  C — the  queen-mother — was  to  verify  and 
authorise  the  business.  The  letter  to  the  queen  ends  with  full  formal  greeting, 
and  then  a  line  of  filial  affection  scrawled  at  the  end  "  and  write  to  me  how  thou 
art.  Farewell."  The  letter  to  A  has  a  mysterious  addition  about  the  king 
(Rameses  XII  ?  or  Herhor?)  being  absent,  and  that  gold  had  been  ordered  to  be 
sent  to  Pai-onkh  but  had  not  come,  and  that  it  was  now  to  be  sent  at  once.  How 
these  three  letters  to  different  persons  came  to  be  put  up  together  is  shewn  by  the 
endorsed  addresses.  They  had  been  received  ;  B  passed  his  to  A  as  a  voucher, 
A  sent  both  together  to  Pai-onkh's  private  secretary,  and  the  queen  did  likewise. 
He  then  put  them  all  together  and  sealed  them,  to  go  into  the  archives  as  business 
done  with.  That  roll,  and  the  two  sacks  in  the  river,  close  the  history  of  the 
indiscreet  constables. 

In  a  brief  paper.  Dr.  Casartelli  warns  readers  against  a  hasty  assumption  that 
Darius  and  his  race  were  Zoroastrians. 

A  note  by  Dr.  Elliot  Smith  on  circumcision  gives  some  evidence  that  it  was 
preparatory  to  marriage  in  Egypt,  and  not  an  infantile  ceremony,  as  in  Judaism. 

Another  note  by  the  same  author,  on  mummifying,  refers  again  to  the 
Ilird  dynasty  mummy  of  Ra-nefer,  well  known  and  published  twenty  years  ago  ; 
it  is  slightly  pre-dated  by  a  mummy  at  Saqqareh,  of  the  Ilnd  or  Ilird  dynasty, 
which  had  each  limb  wrapped  separately.  What  was  probably  a  still  earlier 
instance  has  been  destroyed  at  the  Cairo  Mu.seum.  The  arm  of  the  queen  of  Zer, 
of  the  1st  dynasty,  which  had  the  gold  bracelets  upon  it,  was  elaborately  wrapped 
in  a  thick  mass  of  the  finest  linen.  It  was  presumed  to  be  a  mummified  arm, 
though  the  flesh  tissue  was  not  recorded  at  the  time.  If  not  mummified,  it  was  an 
example  of  the  unfleshing  of  the  body,  so  well  known  from  earlier  times. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


sphinx,  1913.     (Uppsala.) 

M.  Henri  Sottas  discusses  the  significance  of  the  title  \  ®  khery-ziizd  nesiit, 

making  good  use  of  the  ancient  second  and  third  dynasty  decrees  discovered  at 
Coptos  by  M.  M.  Weill  and  Adolph  Reinach.  He  proves  it  to  be  one  of  the 
honorific  titles  asserting  a  close  friendship  with  the  Pharaoh,  and  to  be  included  in 
the  Egyptian  hierarchy. 

M.  Ernst  Anderson  reviews  M.  G.  Jequier's  "  The  Egyptian  Monuments  in 
Diocletian's  palace  at  Spalato."  One  of  these  is  a  sphinx,  of  interest  because  it 
is  much  the  largest  specimen  of  these  mythical  creatures,  of  the  type  which  shows 
the  animal  holding  a  vase  in  its  front  paws,  which  terminate  in  human  hands. 
Around  the  sphinx's  base  are  a  series  of  cartouches  giving  the  names  of  vanquished 
foreign  peoples,  or  tribes  ;  of  much  value  for  comparison  with,  and  the  completion 
of,  the  famous  Karnak  list,  of  similar  character,  of  Thotmes  III.  The  Pharaoh's 
name  has  disappeared  from  the  sphinx,  but  it  should  be  that  of  Thotmes  III,  or 
Rameses  II.  In  future  this  text  will  have  to  be  considered  when  editing  the 
conquest  lists  of  these  two  kings. 

M    2 


i8o  Sphinx,   191 3. 

M.  H.  Sottas  has  a  study  of  the  real  concept  connected  with  the  Egyptian 
word  Ka.  He  shows  that  the  LJ  in  the  singular,  and  the  U  U  Ui  or  plural, 
connote  different  ideas.  The  first  is  the  double,  or  spirit  of  a  man,  and  of  a 
Pharaoh,  and  will  be  the  seat  of  his  life  in  the  next  world.  As  Pharaohs  were 
already  deified  when  upon  earth,  that  is  to  say,  had  passed  from  mortality  to  an 
assumed  immortality,  they  possessed  a  ka  whilst  living  here.  The  earthly  function 
of  the  royal  ka  was  to  personify  the  king's  divine  name,  and  to  carry  its  hieroglyph 
standard  behind  the  Pharaoh  at  all  priestly  functions.  No  doubt  some  acolyte  of 
each  temple  assumed  this  role  when  the  king  acted  as  a  sacrificial  priest.  In  a 
few  rare  cases,  non-royal  Egyptians  who  had  been  deified  whilst  still  living,  seem 
to  have  also  had  an  earthly  ka. 

The  plural  kau  symbolised  the  vital  forces  as  personified  in  certain  deities. 
These  gods  are  clearly  displayed  as  so  personified  by  their  kas  in  the  tableaus  of 
the  birth  of  deified  princes  of  the  royal  line  of  Horus  at  Der-el  Bahri  and  at  Karnak. 
Ordinary  mortals  received  their  vital  force  of  kau  at  birth,  but  became  separated 
from  them  at  death ;  whilst  a  Pharaoh,  being  deified,  and  so  immortal,  did  not 
lose  his  at  his  decease. 

M.  Ernst  Anderson,  in  reviewing  an  essay  by  M.  Gaillard  upon  the  domesti- 
cated animals  of  ancient  Egypt,  shows  that  the  Egyptians  possessed  a  race  of  oxen 
without  horns,  as  well  as  kept  cattle  whose  horns  had  been  artificially  removed. 

The  same  writer  mentions  the  publication  by  M.  Grapow  of  six  mutilated 
lines  of  a  third  recension  of  "The  Story  of  the  Predestined  Prince,"  which  are 
upon  a  piece  of  papyrus  at  Turin.  These  have  been  used  by  Sir  Gaston  Maspero 
for  his  final  edition  of  this  story. 

Dr.  L.  Reutter,  of  Neuchatel,  gives  a  careful  chemical  analysis  of  the  ingredients 
utilised  for  mummifying  birds,  and  proves  that  the  resinous  base  consisted  of  Judean 
Balm.  The  other  materials  used  for  these  avian  embalmings  were  the  gum  of  the 
cedar  tree  and  of  the  Pistacio  Terebintliiis.  Palm  wine  was  added,  probably  as 
an  alcoholic  solvent  of  the  resins.  Natron  also  was  probably  utilised,  and  some 
special  unguent  whose  nature  is  indeterminable. 

Joseph  Offord. 


(     i8i     ) 


REVIEWS. 


r 


TAe  Eastern  Libyans.  By  Oric  Bates.  4to,  298  pp.,  11  plates,  113  figures. 
42i-.     1914.     (Macmillan.) 

This  monumental  work  is  of  a  kind  which  is  much  needed  in  various  branches 
of  history  ;  it  is  a  compilation  of  all  facts  and  references  concerning  Eastern  Libya, 
with  sufficient  discussion  in  general,  and  based  upon  personal  knowledge  of  the 
country.  It  is  strange  how  much  land  lying  close  to  civilised  traffic  is  practically 
unknown.  Myriads  pass  along  the  Mediterranean  yearly,  not  one  in  a  generation 
goes  along  the  shore ;  tourists  swarm  up  the  Nile,  not  one  sets  foot  on  the  cliffs 
which  they  pass  ;  thousands  of  Anglo-Indians  sail  down  the  Red  Sea,  while  the 
mountains  on  either  side  are  less  known  than  Uganda  or  Arizona.  North  Africa 
has  stood  outside  of  civilised  interests, — the  fatal  legacy  of  the  Arab  conquest. 
The  occupation  of  Algeria  and  Tunis  has  not  touched  the  eastern  part  ;  and  in  the 
present  work  Mr.  Bates  has  had  an  open  field  without  a  rival.  As  a  whole  the  task 
has  been  worthily  done  ;  apparently  exhaustively  as  to  material,  clearly  classified, 
interpreted  profitably,  and  swarming  with  references  to  the  lasting  benefit  of  those 
who  follow.  The  type  is  sumptuous,  but  the  drawn  illustrations  are  curiously  coarse, 
and  not  adequate  in  detail  for  so  complete  a  publication.  We  may  now  proceed  to 
give  an  outline  of  the  contents,  with  some  notes  on  details  of  Egyptian  interest. 

The  first  chapter  is  on  the  physiography.  The  character  of  the  land  is 
described  from  personal  knowledge,  with  more  brevity  than  most  other  countries 
could  be  treated,  owing  to  its  dreary  uniformity.  The  coast  and  the  desert  plateaus 
are  detailed,  with  the  itineraries  of  the  main  roads,  and  the  oases.  The  climate  and 
health  conditions  are  fully  described,  the  flora  and  fauna,  and  the  statistics  and  life 
of  the  people.  The  glowing  account  of  Berber  virtues  quoted  from  Ibn  Khaldun 
makes  us  wish  that  such  an  excellent  people  had  more  effect  on  Southern 
Eurojje.  That  such  men  have  not  vanished  is  shown  by  the  splendid  character  of 
Abd  el  Kader.  Perhaps  they  have  a  future  yet  before  them  ;  tens  of  thousands 
of  Algerians  are  already  brought  into  France  as  agriculturalists,  to  supplement  the 
waning  population.  If  Europe  empties  itself  in  a  great  war,  it  seems  likely  that  the 
Moor  will  be  one  of  the  immigrating  races  to  fill  up  the  vacancies. 

The  second  chapter  on  the  ethnology  is  a  mass  of  detail,  which  needs  much 
research  for  its  simplification.  The  basic  race  is  said  to  be  Hamitic,  "a  type  tall, 
spare,  long-limbed,  and  dark  ;  hair  black  or  dark  brown,  straight  or  wavy,  head 
dolichocephalic,  orthognathous,  nose  slightly  aquiline  or  straight  ;  eyes  dark  and 
piercing,  set  rather  widely  apart ;  mouth  well-defined ;  facial  capillary  .system 
slightly  developed  ;  movements  generally  slow  and  dignified  "  (p.  39).  How  far 
such  a  type  is  the  product  of  the  land,  is  the  question.  It  seems  in  most  points  to 
be  closely  adapted  to  the  conditions  ;  yet  it  is  of  a  higher  nature  than  would  be 
likely  to  be  produced  by  such  a  poor  region.  May  we  then  not  see  in  these  people 
immigrants  from  a  more  favourable  country  adapted  to  the  Saharan  fringe,  and 

M  3 


1 82  Reviews. 

therefore  not  obviously  at  one  with  their  original  stock  ?  This  Hamitic  people  have 
in  the  south-west  received  a  negro  mixture.  In  the  north  along  the  coast  there  is 
a  brachycephalic  Berber  race,  and  in  the  mountains  a  blond  population,  both  of 
which  are  intrusive.  The  blonds  are  not  due  to  the  Vandal  immigration,  as  they 
are  represented  on  the  monuments  of  the  XlXth  dynasty.  The  earlier  figures  of 
Libyans  are,  however,  brown  ;  may  not  this  difference  be  due  to  the  Egyptians  at 
first  only  knowing  the  Eastern  Libyans  who  are  dark,  and  the  fair  Libyans  who 
came  forward  later,  having  come  from  the  Algerian  mountains  and  Morocco,  where 
they  still  live? 

On  the  more  detailed  question  of  the  position  of  various  tribes  named  by  the 
Egyptians,  Mr.  Bates  prefers  to  ignore  the  close  connection  of  the  various  names 
with  those  in  Algeria  and  Tunis.  Eight  tribal  names  are  found  in  that  region, 
while  only  two  can  be  also  paralleled  by  names  of  the  Eastern  Libyans.  The  fact 
that  the  XlXth  dynasty  Libyans  are  fair  might  be  a  warning  to  us  that  they  came 
from  the  region  where  fair  races  can  now  dwell,  and  not  from  the  Eastern  Libyans 
who  are  dark.  The  persistence  of  names  is  often  under-rated,  but  we  have  to  deal 
with  only  a  short  time — less  than  a  thousand  years — between  the  Egyptian  wars 
and  the  classical  geography.  In  England,  in  spite  of  the  crushing  Saxon  and 
Danish  immigrations,  half  of  our  cities  bear  British  or  Roman  names  of  two 
thousand  years  ago.  In  Italy,  Greece,  or  Syria,  nearly  all  the  names  are  ancient. 
Such  persistence,  naturally,  does  not  appeal  to  the  American  mind.  The  supposed 
evidence  as  to  the  distance  of  the  tribes,  three  weeks'  march  from  Egypt,  only  refers 
to  the  distance  of  their  mobilisation  for  the  final  march  over  the  barren  region  near 
Egypt,  and  has  no  relation  to  the  distances  they  moved  in  order  to  be  gathered 
together.  The  mixture  of  those  tribes  in  one  army  with  the  Shardana  and  Shakalsha 
points  again  to  their  being  in  the  Algerian  region,  near  Sardinia  and  Sicily,  and  not 
in  Tripoli  which  had  small  attraction  for  European  races.  The  whole  of  the  tribal 
names  known  in  different  later  periods  are  here  set  out,  and  illustrated  in  a  series 
of  maps,  which  are  of  great  value  for  reference. 

The  ne.xt  chapter  deals  with  language  and  writing.  The  various  opinions  on 
the  origin  of  Berber  are  stated.  The  mutations  of  sounds  between  the  different 
dialects  are  illustrated.  Some  principal  descriptive  roots  in  place-names  are 
discussed  in  connection  with  modern  Berber ;  and  it  is  noticeable  how  most  of  them 
are  Italic  roots  ;  D  R  R,  mountains,  durus,  rugged  ;  M  '  R,  M  G  R,  great,  maior, 
fuiKpof  ;  thagura,  shelter,  tuguriuni,  a  hut ;  L  G,  a  well  or  pool,  lacus,  a  pool ; 
K  B,  summit,  caput,  head.  The  persistence  of  the  Berber  roots  from  Egyptian 
times  is  noted ;  and  lastly  parallels  are  given  between  twenty  Egyptian  and  Berber 
words.  Such  connections,  and  the  grammatical  similarities,  show  a  strong 
connection, — perhaps  an  underlying  common  speech,  which  was  differently 
developed  and  modified  by  immigration  in  each  country. 

The  Berber  writing  is  shown  to  have  largely  survived  from  ancient  to  modern 
times,  like  all  other  alphabets  that  we  know.  The  old  idea  of  the  importance  of 
Phoenician  origins  is  not  shaken  off;  for  though  stating  that  "  The  non-Semitic  part 
of  the  alphabet  is  composed  mainly  of  those  signs  which  from  their  distribution 
might  almost  be  called  Mediterranean,  and  which  are  seen  in  the  Celtiberian  and 
Turdetan  alphabets  of  the  west,  in  the  Cypriote  syllabary,  and  even  in  Minoan 
Crete,"  yet  six  signs  out  of  thirty  are  reserved  as  claimed  for  Phoenician  descent. 
It  is  far  simpler  to  regard  the  whole  as  part  of  the  Mediterranean  signary,  which — 
long  before  it  was  used  for  writing — is  found  used  as  personal  marks  upon  property 
in  Egypt. 


Reviews.  183 

The  chapter  on  Economics  is  full  of  interest,  as  dealing  with  the  means  of 
living  and  trade  in  a  region  which,  by  its  barrenness,  presents  so  many  difficulties. 
Cattle  were  naturally  the  most  important  wealth  in  early  times  ;  but  agriculture 
was  followed  in  the  XlXth  dynasty,  and  became  so  important  in  the  middle  region 
that  the  treatise  of  the  Carthaginian  Mago  was  translated  as  the  standard  work  for 
the  use  of  Romans.  The  views  of  Ridgeway  as  to  the  Libyan  breed  of  the  tall 
horse  are  here  rejected,  and  we  are  assured  that  they  "were  little  more  than  ponies." 
This  does  not  agree  with  the  tall  horses  in  the  chariots  figured  on  vases. 

Society  and  government  is  briefly  discussed.  The  laws  of  marriage  and 
inheritance  are  on  a  par  with  what  seem  to  have  prevailed  in  early  Egypt.  There 
was  much  influence  of  matriarchy,  although  among  the  wealthy  classes  there  was 
unlimited  polygamy.  A  curious  distinction  at  present  among  the  Imushagh  is  that 
property  acquired  by  work  is  inherited  by  children,  but  plunder  is  inherited  by  the 
eldest  sister's  eldest  son.  The  primitive  kind  of  acquisition  still  goes  in  the  primitive 
descent.  A  curious  remark  is  made  that  in  the  genealogy  of  Horpasen,  no  man  is 
stated  to  have  more  than  one  wife ;  but,  as  that  is  a  strict  genealogy,  the  fact  that 
no  man  could  have  two  mothers,  at  once  limits  the  case. 

Dress  and  ornamentation  is  next  described.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  upper 
class  Libyans  of  the  XlXth  dynasty  are  shown  with  long  robes  down  to  the  calf  of 
the  leg,  much  more  clad  than  the  Egyptians.  This  again  points  to  the  later  Libyans 
having  come  from  the  colder  highlands  of  Algeria.  The  earliest.  Libyan  figure  on 
the  gaming  reed  of  king  Oa  is  misinterpreted.  The  face  is  unquestionably  Libyan 
(see  the  Antaeus  given  by  Mr.  Bates  on  p.  260,  and  the  Mashuash  in  "  Racial 
Types,"  1 54,  164-6),  and  the  name  sethet  over  it  belongs  to  (i)  people  of  the  regions 
of  the  1st  cataract,  or  (2)  to  Asiatics.  As  Mr.  Bates  is  particular  to  recognise 
a  branch  of  Libyans  at  the  cataract,  in  the  so-called  C  group  of  graves,  the  name, 
as  well  as  the  portraiture,  points  to  the  Libyan  race.  Another  figure  of  which 
Mr.  Bates  denies  the  Libyan  connection  (p.  118)  has  the  Libyan  lock  of  hair,  unlike 
that  of  any  other  people,  though  unplaited  as  in  figs.  17  and  22.  The  similarity  of 
pattern  between  that  on  a  Libyan  robe  and  on  Sardinian  pottery  is  an  excellent 
connection  of  design  (fig.  16). 

The  sheath  worn  by  the  men  is  fully  illustrated  and  described.  In  the  pre- 
historic figures  (figs.  1 8,  a,  b)  the  top  of  it  shews  a  strong  suggestion  of  a  dagger 
handle  (see  fig.  59,  c,  d) ;  is  it  not  possible — as  daggers  were  then  used — that  the 
dagger  was  worn  in  front,  and  combined  with  the  male  sheath?  If  so,  the  wearing 
of  the  dagger  may  have  first  suggested  the  protection  of  a  sheath  for  the  person. 
It  is  a  Germanism  to  call  it  "  penistasche,"  by  no  means  "  known  to  archaeologists," 
as  the  names  sheath,  etui  and  cornet,  are  in  proper  use  outside  of  Germany. 

The  patterns  of  the  belts  are  figured,  apparently  using  plates  of  shell,  which 
was  a  favourite  material  in  pre-historic  Egypt.  The  exact  resemblance  of  the  hat 
of  Arkesilaus  on  the  vase  painting  to  a  modern  Saharan  hat  is  one  of  the  happiest 
parallels ;  it  shews  how  even  trivial  details  may  survive  for  thousands  of  years  in 
use.  In  connection  with  the  Libyan  tatuing,  which  is  figured  from  Tell  el  Amarna, 
the  similar  tatuing  on  the  skin  of  the  mummy  of  Ament,  priestess  of  Hathor,  of 
the  Xllth  dynasty,  in  the  Cairo  Museum,  should  be  noted.  The  well-known 
emblems  of  Neit  tatued  upon  the  Libyans  of  Sety  I  are  figured  and  discussed,  in 
agreement  with  the  general  opinion  that  they  indicate  a  regard  for  that  goddess. 

The  material  culture  and  art  is  an  important  chapter,  though  in  the  absence 
of  any  trace  of  the  early  Libyans  in  Libya  itself,  our  knowledge  is  very  imperfect. 
The  objects  used,  or  yielded  as  tribute,  by  the  Libyans  are  largely  reckoned  by 

M  4 


184  Reviews. 

Mr.  Bates  as  imports  into  Libya,  the  vases  from  Syria,  the  swords  from  Sardinia. 
The  lack  of  metal  weapons  in  classical  tim^s  is  used  as  a  strong  argument  for  the 
metal  of  earlier  times  hav'ing  been  imported.  If  so,  it  implies  that  there  were 
corresponding  exports  of  large  value  from  Libya.  What  can  such  exports  have 
been  ?  The  nine  thousand  copper  swords  taken  by  Merenptah  must  have  cost 
a  large  export  for  the  Libyans  to  purchase  them.  It  is  hardly  relevant  to  bring  in 
the  well-known  Fayum  desert  flints  in  discussing  historic  Libyans.  The  age  of 
these,  indicated  by  their  colouring,  is  long  before  the  periods  otherwise  discussed  ; 
and  the  absence  of  flints  of  these  types  from  all  known  periods  of  Egyptian  tombs 
points  to  their  being  earlier  than  even  the  pre-historic  civilisation  of  Egypt.  Only 
one  flint  shewn,  No.  32,  is  of  Egyptian  type,  of  the  middle  pre-historic  age  ;  and 
that  probably  is  a  stray  specimen,  and  not  of  the  Fayum  class. 

The  various  articles  of  modern  Imushagh  furniture  are  listed,  with  the  parallel 
list  of  the  ancient  objects  so  far  as  recorded.  The  awls  which  it  is  ."iaid  they  must 
have  had  for  leather  work,  were  doubtless  the  sharp  pointed  fish  jaws  so  commonly 
found  in  Egyptian  town  sites,  evidently  collected  as  borers. 

The  poetic  system  of  modern  Imushagh  verse  is  described,  as  illustrating  the 
description  of  the  ancient  religious  songs.  It  appears  to  be  much  looser  and  more 
casual  than  any  ballad  verse  of  Europe,  perhaps  nearest  the  Italian  impromptu 
couplets.  With  the  exception  of  one  imitation  of  an  Egyptian  stele  there  is 
nothing  that  can  be  called  Libyan  art,  for  figures  that  are  obviously  under  Graeco- 
Roman  influence  do  not  count.  In  the  architecture  there  are  very  few  stone 
megaliths  in  Eastern  Libya.  Those  in  North-west  Africa  are  in  one  group  with 
the  western  European  megaliths,  and  Mr.  Bates  reasonably  concludes  that  the 
people  who  erected  them  were  the  blond  race  which  appears  to  have  come  down 
through  Spain.  The  strongholds  are  mentioned  by  Diodorus  and  Pliny,  and  may 
be  identified  with  various  rude-stone  structures,  having  a  ditch  around,  and 
buildings  on  the  plateau.  The  slighter  dwellings  were  booths  with  tall  conical 
roofs,  which  formed  the  outskirts  of  the  Roman  towns,  and  were  probably  such 
shelters  as  the  Therapeutae  used  in  their  camps.  The  farms  were  more  permanent 
thatched  huts. 

The  religion  demands  more  space  than  any  other  chapter.  Sacred  stones  and 
their  worship,  and  the  animism  seen  in  the  wind  are  first  dealt  with.  Then  tabu 
animals,  divination,  rain-craft,  and  magic.  Burial  was  important  among  the 
Libyans,  mostly  contracted ;  but  though  the  Egyptian  laid  the  corpse  on  its  side, 
the  Libyan  placed  it  seated  upright.  Piles  of  stones  and  offerings  occur,  as  might 
be  expected. 

The  list  of  Libyan  gods  is  larger  than  might  be  hoped.  The  first.  Ash  is 
probably  the  same  as  dUsh,  a  divinity  in  the  95th  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead.  It  is  not  connected  with  figures  on  the  early  sealings,  which  are  quoted. 
Those  are  of  Shu,  sometimes  written  inverted  as  ush,  but  then  with  the  single 
upright  feather  of  Shu  on  the  head  of  the  god.  {R.T.,  Sealings  178,  179,  199, 
200.)  A  god  named  Shaheded  appears  in  personal  names,  connected  with 
a  bilingual  inscription  where  Latin  SACTVT  is  in  Libyan  SKTT.  Sinifere 
and  Mastiman  are  known  from  Corippus.  The  "  Libyan  Poseidon "  is  not 
identified  with  a  native  name ;  nor  is  the  god  Triton,  also  named  by  Herodotos. 
The  Sun-god  is  said  to  have  received  sacrifices,  and  is  later  identified  with 
Hammon  ;  at  the  Ammonium  in  Siwah  was  a  fountain  sacred  to  the  sun.  But 
the  native  name  of  the  sun  was  Gurzil,  who  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  the  prophetic 
god   of  Siwah,    otherwise    identified    with     Amen.     Thus    the    connection   with 


Reviews.  185 

Amen-Ra  is  shewn  by  either  belief.    The  name  and  worship  of  Gurzil,  as  Gurza,  lasted 
down  to  the  eleventh  century. 

A  long  discussion  is  given  to  the  oracular  Oasis  god,  here  called  Deus  Fatidicus. 
He  was  the  native  god,  and  his  form  is  apparently  given  as  an  embalmed  figure, 
seated  and  entir^  wrapped  over  in  bandages,  without  the  head  projecting.  Three 
such  figures  were  found  at  Karnak,  named  as  Amen.  Two  other  representations 
of  such  bandaged  figures  on  thrones,  but  with  the  head  of  Amen  added,  are  on 
a  relief  at  Karnak,  and  on  an  engraved  (not  "  etched  ")  mirror.  This  kind  of 
representation,  it  is  suggested,  is  like  that  of  the  wrapped  up  human  sacrifice,  the 
teknu  ;  and  it  should  also  be  noted  that  the  early  tektiu,  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  has 
no  head  (OuiBELL,  Ratnesseuni,  PI.  IX).  As  the  Libyans  buried  the  wrapped  up 
dead  seated,  this  attitude  of  the  god  agrees  to  its  being  an  embalmed  body.  What 
may  be  the  connection  of  this  entirely  wrapped  up  Amen,  and  the  name  of  the 
god  meaning  "the  hidden"?  Mr.  Bates  protests  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the 
oasis  of  Siwah  was  Egyptianised  earlier  than  the  XXVIth  dynasty ;  but  may  not 
a  protoform  Amen  underlie  both  the  Theban  Amen  and  the  Siwan  ?  Another 
point  which  should  also  be  searched  out  is  that  the  Carthaginian  form  is  always 
Haman,  and  the  Latin  form  of  the  oasis  god  also  has  the  aspirate,  Hammon. 

A  vague  Sky-god  is  identified  with  Saturn,  and  appears  in  some  dedications. 
The  special  Ausean  goddess,  described  by  Herodotos,  is  conjectured  to  have  been 
the  Sky-goddess.  The  western  origin  of  Neit  is  discussed,  and  concluded  to  be  most 
probable.  In  a  note,  the  arrows  of  the  sign  of  Neit  are  said  to  have  a  concave 
cutting  edge  ;  but  in  the  clear  examples — -such  as  the  great  stele  of  Merneit — the 
arrow  head  is  straight,  and  the  actual  arrows  found  have  straight  chisel  ends  of 
flint,  never  concave.  The  concave  end  is  only  found  in  the  larger  lance  heads, 
such  as  the  one  figured  (VIII,  32)  which  is  pre-historic  Egyptian  and  not  Libyan. 

A  summary  of  the  history  of  Libya  concludes  the  work.  The  whole  of  the 
records  are  discus.sed,  and  put  in  their  historical  position  and  relative  conditions, 
in  a  very  clear  and  satisfactory  manner.  We  may  only  note  that  (p.  212)  the 
pectoral  of  Senusert  I,  should  read  S.  Ill  ;  and  the  statement  that  the  Prince 
Sheshenq  appealed  to  a  king  of  the  XX  1st  dynasty  has  no  monumental  dating  to 
fi.x  it,  the  statements  (p.  228)  all  depend  on  the  supposed  Libyan  origin  of  the 
"  Man  of  Susa  " — Sheshenq,  which  is  improbable.  Pheritime  for  Pheretime,  and 
Harcoris  for  Akhoris,  need  correction. 

Five  appendices  discuss  collateral  matters  of  value.  The  first  deals  with 
what  are  known  as  the  C  group  of  burials  in  Nubia.  These  Mr.  Bates  connects 
with  the  Libyans,  adducing  similarity  of  type,  circular  superstructures  to  graves, 
cross  bands  worn  by  men  and  skirts  by  women,  feather  on  head,  tatuing,  pottery, 
and  some  other  details.  He  concludes  that  they  were  of  the  Temehu.  The 
second  appendix  deals  with  two  Gheytah  inscriptions,  claiming  that  they  are 
in  a  South  Arabian  script.  The  alphabet  proposed  seems  to  vary  quite  as 
much  from  those  forms  as  does  the  Libyan  already  suggested.  The  third 
appendix  deals  with  the  traditional  origins  of  different  Libyan  people ;  the  fourth 
with  Biblical  references  to  Libya;  the  fifth  with  the  type  of  the  Libyan  giant 
Antaeus  on  a  va.se  of  Euphronios,  shewing  the  Libyan  features,  like  the 
Mashuash  154,  164,  in  "Racial  Types."  A  dozen  pages  of  bibliography  and 
various  indices  complete  the  volume. 

Such  a  comprehensive  work  is  only  possible  where  our  knowledge  is  not 
extensive.  On  any  well-known  race  any  one  of  the  chapters  might  well  exceed 
the  size  of  the  whole  book.     It  is  a  kind  of  summary  which  is  greatly  needed  for 


1 86  Reviews. 

various  less-known  countries,  and  it  will  serve  as  a  starting  point  for  fuller  research 
in  several  lines.  It  is  moreover  not  a  book-man's  compilation,  but  a  reading  of 
all  the  material  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  personal  familiarity  with  the  land  and 
the  modern  people.  We  hope  that  Mr.  Bates  may  yet  produce  much  more  of  such 
solid  and  comprehensive  work  ;  with  perhaps  a  more  cautious  investigation  of 
matters  where  he  may  happen  not  to  agree  with  other  writers. 

Egyptian  Blue. — Laukie,  A.  P.;  McLlNTOCK,  W.  F.  P.;  MiLES,  F.  D. 
8vo.,  12  pp.  {Proc.  Royal  Soc,  Vol.  89,  418-429.)  The  brilliant  shades  of  blue  and 
green  used  in  Egyptian  colouring  have  always  been  attractive,  whether  applied  as 
a  paint,  or  fused  in  a  glaze  ;  while,  unless  exposed  to  continuous  moisture,  the 
colour  is  unchangeable.  The  same  colours  are  found  to  have  been  used  in  glazes 
from  pre-historic  times,  and  as  a  wall  paint  from  the  XI  1th  dynasty.  From  Egypt 
they  passed  to  Greece  and  Italy,  and  balls  of  blue  paint  are  among  the  colours 
found  at  Pompeii.  The  method  by  which  this  colour  was  made  was  first  illustrated 
by  excavation  in  1892  {Tell  el-Amama,  p.  25).  Pebbles  of  white  quartz  were 
ground  to  a  coarse  powder,  mixed  with  alkali,  lime,  and  copper  ore,  and  then 
heated  so  as  to  combine  slowly  without  actually  melting.  This  produces  a  frit,  or 
porous  mass  of  crystals,  which  can  easily  be  ground  down  to  a  powder.  The 
alkali — potash  or  soda — attacked  the  silica,  and  then  handed  it  on  to  the  lime  and 
copper  ;  thus  was  gradually  formed  a  silicate  of  lime  and  copper.  The  shade  of  it 
depended  on  the  proportion  of  copper  in  the  blues,  and  the  presence  of  traces  of 
iron  in  the  greens,  while  the  depth  and  richness  of  colour  depended  on  the  length 
and  amount  of  the  heat.  The  reproduction  of  the  colours  was  carried  out  with 
great  success  in  the  hundreds  of  experiments  made  by  the  late  Dr.  VV.  J.  Russell,  of 
which  he  published  an  outline  in  Medum,  pp.  45,  46.  He  found  that  the  silica  was 
sixty  to  eighty  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  a  very  delicate  greenish  blue  was  made 
with  three  to  five  per  cent,  of  copper  ore,  a  full  blue  with  ten,  and  a  rich  violet 
with  twenty  per  cent.  An  ordinary  brown  sand  contains  enough  iron  to  give 
a  green  tone  to  the  blue.  Further  details  on  the  manufacture  were  found  at 
Memphis  {Historical  Studies,  p.  35).  The  colour  after  being  formed  in  pans,  as 
found  at  Tell  el-Amarna,  was  made  up  into  balls,  some  "3,  some  i*2  inches  in 
diameter.  These  balls  were  placed  in  large  jars  of  pottery,  lids  were  sealed  over 
the  mouths  ;  and  then  the  long  roasting  for  many  hours,  which  gave  the  finest 
colour,  could  be  carried  on  without  the  air  or  furnace  gases  reaching  the  balls.  As 
the  pottery  of  the  jars  contained  iron  it  would  discolour  the  balls  if  in  contact  with 
them  ;  the  jars  were  therefore  lined  with  a  thick  coat  of  blue  colour,  so  that  the  iron 
discolouration  never  passed  through  the  lining,  which  was  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
thick.  This  shows  how  large  a  part  of  the  material  the  Egyptian  would  sacrifice 
in  order  to  get  the  finest  result.  Some  of  the  linings  were  of  most  magnificent 
purple-blue  colour.  This  will  serve  just  to  show  how  the  subject  stands  from  the 
point  of  view  of  actual  finds  of  objects. 

The  paper  above  named  takes  up  the  questions  from  a  laboratory  point  of  view. 
Dr.  Laiirie  examined  specimens  of  blue  on  a  coffin  of  the  Xlth  dynasty,  on  XVII  Ith 
dynasty  samples  from  Gurob,  on  Knossos  frescoes,  on  Roman  samples  from  the 
Palatine  frescoes,  and  from  Viroconium.  All  of  these  were  similar  in  nature,  a  truly 
crystalline  compound  identical  in  its  character.  On  studying  the  samples  which 
Dr.  Russell  had  prepared,  together  with  his  notes,  it  was  seen  that  where  lime  was 
used  without  alkali,  repeated  heating  and  grinding  was  needed  to  attain  the  blue 
colour ;  where  alkali  was  also  used  the  colour  was  got  in  the  first  heating,  as  it  acted 


I 


Reviews.  187 

as  a  solvent.     Alkali  alone,  without  lime,  only  produces  a  blue  glass,  and  not  the 
true  crystalline  blue. 

Experiments  were  then  made  to  find  the  conditions  of  heating  required.  The 
batches  were  kept  uniformly  heated  for  sixteen  to  twenty  hours.  That  at  760° 
centigrade  was  vtflry  imperfectly  combined,  at  800°  it  was  better,  at  830°  there  was 
still  much  uncombined.  By  grinding  and  reheating  at  this  temperature,  however, 
the  blue  was  completely  formed.  At  890°  and  905°,  cherry-red  heat,  it  was  overdone. 
As  a  trial  some  was  heated  up  to  1,150°  (white  heat,  melting  of  cast  iron)  and  to 
1400°  (dazzling  white  heat),  and  a  green  glass  was  formed  ;  when  this  was  toasted 
at  the  850°  point,  the  true  blue  was  reproduced.  One  sample  was  absolutely  fused 
in  the  oxyhydrogen  flame,  but  two  days'  heating  at  850°  brought  it  to  a  brilliant 
blue.  Thus  it  seems  immaterial  what  happens  first  to  the  mixture,  so  long  as  it 
gets  a  day  or  two  of  toasting  at  a  moderate  red  heat.  This  exactly  accords  with 
the  Egyptian  practice  of  heating  in  sealed  jars,  as  at  Memphis.  It  is  remarked  how 
narrow  a  range  of  temperature  is  needful  ;  one  twentieth  of  the  heat,  more  or  less, 
and  the  process  is  spoiled.  The  Egyptian  must  have  watched  his  furnace  very 
carefully  to  keep  up  the  exact  heat  for  so  long  a  process. 

The  proportions  of  the  mixture  were  then  varied,  keeping  to  850°  as  the  best 
temperature.  When  the  alkali  was  a  fifth  of  the  whole  no  blue  was  formed,  as  it 
dissolved  in  the  alkali  as  a  green  glass  ;  with  a  seventh  a  frit  resulted  with  some 
blue ;  with  a  twelfth  of  alkali  the  result  was  excellent.  On  using  only  silica  lime 
and  copper  without  any  alkali,  overheating  to  produce  combination,  and  then 
toasting  at  the  right  heat,  a  little  blue  resulted,  but  the  process  was  not  practicable. 
With  only  a  twenty-fourth  of  alkali,  and  overheating,  with  subsequent  toasting, 
a  full  blue  can  be  obtained,  but  slowly.  As  the  Egyptians  had  not  a  pure  alkali, 
a  sample  was  made  up  to  correspond  to  the  native  natron,  and  this  with  forty  hours 
heating  gave  excellent  results.  A  sample  was  then  completely  freed  of  uncombined 
material  and  of  fu.sed  glass,  by  usual  chemical  means,  and  the  analysis  of  the  true 
blue  crystals  gave 

Silica         ...         ...         63'4 

Lime         ...         ...         I4"4 

Copper  oxide       ...         19*5 

Potash      ...         ...  I'l 

Soda         ...         ...  '9 


99'3 
This    corresponds    very    nearly    to    the    formula    originally    stated    by    Fouque, 
CaO,  CuO,  4SiOj,  crystallizing  in  the  prismatic  (tetragonal)  system. 

At  the  close  of  the  paper  are  some  speculations  as  to  how  the  Egyptians 
originally  discovered  the  colour.  Unfortunately  Dr.  Laurie  accepts  the  theory  of 
Mr.  Burton  that  the  Egyptians  carved  objects  of  sandstone  and  then  glazed  them. 
For  several  reasons  this  is  entirely  impossible.  No  sandstone  is  known  in  Egypt  of 
texture  or  quality  approaching  that  of  the  base  which  was  used  for  glazing.  The 
base  shows  in  its  body,  when  fractured,  spherical  hollows  which  were  evidently 
bubbles  of  air,  included,  when  it  was  being  made  up  with  water,  artificially  before 
baking.  Lastly,  the  forms  found  in  all  periods,  such  as  long  tubular  beads,  would 
be  impossible  to  cut  out  of  a  solid  piece.  The  utmost  that  can  be  allowed  is  that 
dry  blocks  of  material,  after  moulding,  may  have  been  trimmed  in  the  details  before 
glazing.  This  is  often  seen  in  the  case  of  minute  retouchings,  but  it  was  certainly 
not  the  case  on  the  general  forms.     The  multitude  of  moulds  for  moulding  the 


1 88  Reviews. 

figures  of  gods  and  every  kind  of  ornament,  show  that  damp  moulding  was  the  rule. 
Only  a  sharpening  of  the  detail  was  done  on  the  dry  material  after  moulding.  The 
careful  exclusion  of  iron  from  the  base  is  remarkable ;  no  native  sand  so  white  is 
known  in  Egypt,  and  it  must  have  been  carefully  prepared  artificially  to  remove  the 
iron,  in  order  to  prevent  the  blue  colour  of  the  glaze  being  spoilt.  As  some  of  the 
earliest  glazing  is  that  on  clear  quartz  crystal  beads  it  seems  very  likely  that  glazing 
was  developed  in  the  course  of  copper  smelting.  The  wood  ash  of  fuel  would  give 
the  alkali,  and  lime  and  silica  would  be  in  the  copper  ore.  Such  a  coloured  slag, 
or  a  glass  run  from  it  on  to  the  pebble  floor  of  the  furnace,  would  then  be  the  starting 
point  for  artificial  imitations. 

Incarnation  {Egyptian). — WIEDEMANN,  A.,  4  pp.  (Hastings'  Dictionary  of 
Religion  and  Ethics.)  This  article  is  a  valuable  one  for  the  explanation  of  ideas, 
and  for  the  insight  into  Egyptian  modes  of  thought.  It  is  written  with  the 
sympathetic  feeling  which  has  made  the  author's  other  works  on  the  religion  so 
much  appreciated.  To  begin  with,  the  Egyptian  frame  of  mind  is  explained, 
which  thinks  of  the  individual  instead  of  the  class,  of  the  limb  instead  of  the  man. 
Actions  were  expressed  as  "  my  eyes  see,"  "  your  legs  walk,"  "  his  hand  strikes  "  ; 
classes  were  said  to  be  of  "  each  men,"  "  each  legs  "  ;  the  whole  was  stated  as  "  to 
its  limit."  This  love  of  the  extremely  concrete,  and  lack  of  abstractions,  pervaded 
all  Egyptian  ideas  of  divinity.  Where  expressions  of  omnipresence  are  used,  it  is 
only  as  a  flattery  of  the  deity,  like  similar  qualities  attributed  to  the  king. 

The  name  was  an  entity  independant  of  the  object,  and  not  identical  with  it ; 
and  the  various  names  of  a  deity  were  independant  subsidiary  deities.  The 
statues  retained  some  of  the  divine  personality  of  a  deity  that  had  entered  them, 
and  became  separate  deities  who  no  way  detracted  from  their  original  inspirer. 
Thus  we  can  understand  the  co-existence  of  many  forms  of  a  single  deity  in  one 
place ;  each  had  its  individuality.  May  not  something  of  the  same  frame  of  mind  be 
traced  in  the  various  local  names  attached  to  different  worships  of  the  Virgin  in 
Italy  ? 

Similarly  the  dead  could  be  availed  of  various  embodiments,  such  as  a  bird, 
a  serpent,  a  crocodile,  or  the  god  Ptah.  This  is  not  metempsychosis,  but  the 
capacity  for  any  form  of  embodiment.  The  dead  could  also  assume  a  human 
form.  The  mummy  was  the  greatest  of  all  dwellings  for  the  spirit ;  and  it  was 
through  its  incarnation  in  the  mummy  that  it  could  again  by  spells  enjoy  all  the 
good  things  of  life  which  were  figured  in  the  tomb. 

The  sacred  animals  were  the  special  seat  of  incarnation  of  the  gods.  Though 
the  animals  were  the  aboriginal  deities,  yet  the  old  worship  was  blended  with  the 
more  spiritual  deities  of  the  prehistoric  civilisation  ;  and  the  deity  of  a  tribe  settling 
in  a  district  was  identified  with  the  aboriginal  animal  god  of  the  place, — Ptah  with 
the  Apis,  Amen  with  the  ram,  Horus  with  the  hawk. 

Man  was  not  a  single  whole,  nor  were  the  gods.  Each  was  a  complex  of 
many  constituents  which  happened  to  be  united.  A  striking  case  of  this  is  where 
the  king  acting  as  a  priestly  ruler,  gives  offerings  to  himself  as  embodied  in  a  figure 
of  divine  character. 

Various  ideas  were  personified.  The  emblems  of  life,  power,  or  stability  were 
figured  with  limbs  carrying  emblems  of  the  king.  The  senses,  and  abstractions, 
such  as  time,  joy,  or  darkness,  are  deified,  receive  homage,  and  are  supplicated. 

The  incarnation  of  a  god  in  the  king,  by  divine  descent,  is  familiar  in  many 
scenes,  as  in  the  temple  of  Luqsor  shewing  the  divine  conception  of  Amenhotep  III, 


Reviews.  1 89 

or  that  of  Deir  el-Bahri  concerning  Hatshepsut.  In  other  myths  any  particle  of 
a  god  could  be  used  to  frame  a  magical  object,  which  might  even  be  to  the 
detriment  of  the  god  himself 

Incarnation  was  also  claimed  by  magicians,  who  asserted  their  embodiment  of 
a  god,  and  demailded  obedience  in  consequence.  Similarly  the  mourning  women 
who  personified  Isis  and  Nebhat  were  inscribed  with  those  names.  The  gods 
might  also  be  incarnate  in  animals ;  and  the  weird  range  of  transformations  in  the 
story  of  Bata  shews  the  unlimited  possibilities  of  such  ideas.  Any  one  touching 
on  these  subjects  should  certainly  study  this  article,  with  its  full  references  and 
authorities  for  each  point  stated. 

Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin. — Boston,  August,  1914.  10  cents.  This 
contains  an  account  of  the  new  arrangement  of  the  Boston  Museum.  It  is  now  in 
five  divisions  ;  first  the  Primitive  Egyptian  Room,  or  Pre-Khufu,  as  it  might  be 
called  ;  in  this  is  a  separate  case  for  each  class  of  prehistoric  pottery,  for  stone 
vases,  for  personal  objects,  and  for  stone  dishes  and  weapons.  The  second  room 
is  for  the  Old  Kingdom,  where  the  fine  seated  figure  of  Khuenra,  and  other  statues, 
with  the  complete  outfit  of  the  architect's  tomb,  will  represent  the  period.  Thirdly, 
the  mastaba  gallery  has  fine  tomb  sculptures  from  Saqqareh.  Fourth,  the  Hyksos 
series  is  very  rich,  from  the  cemetery  of  Kerma,  which  we  described  in  the  last 
number  (p.  138).  Lastly,  in  the  loggia  are  the  stone  and  gold  necklaces  of  the 
Middle  and  New  Kingdoms,  bracelets,  earrings  and  amulets.  Three  views  in  the 
museum  are  given,  and  illustrations  of  half  a  dozen  early  Chinese  bronze  vases  add 
to  the  interest  of  this  number. 

The  Boomerang  in  Ancient  Babylonia. — NiES,  J.  B.,  7  pp.  (The  American 
Anthropologist,  Vol.  16.)  The  requirements  for  a  true  returning  boomerang  are 
here  given,  and  the  opinion  of  a  professed  thrower  that  the  Egyptian  bent  flat 
sticks,  with  one  face  flat  and  the  other  convex,  would  return  if  thrown  high  at 
birds.  Examples  are  given  of  the  form  of  the  Assyrian  sign  geshpu,  shewing  that 
from  the  time  of  Gudea  back  to  the  prehistoric,  the  earlier  the  form  the  more  near 
the  boomerang  shape.  As  among  the  meanings  of  the  word  is  "  throw,  strike, 
destroy,  turn,  return,  deviate,"  it  seems  very  probable  that  it  represents  the 
returning  boomerang. 

Les  Negres  d'Afrique. — OVERBERGH,  C.  VAN,  8vo,  276  pp.  (Dewit,  Bruxelles.) 
This  volume  is  an  outline  of  a  great  work  on  Descriptive  Sociology,  of  which  ten 
volumes  on  Africa  have  been  published.  The  introductions  to  these  volumes  are 
here  given,  together  with  the  table  of  classified  contents.  The  system  of  tabulation 
of  results  under  202  different  headings  is  a  sight  to  stimulate  recording  and 
research.  Unhappily  we  fear  that  all  scientific  work  in  Belgium  will  long  be  in 
abeyance,  so  that  we  can  hardly  hope  to  see  the  volumes  on  Egypt  which  were  in 
the  programme  of  this  enterprise. 


(     I90    ) 


NOTES   AND    NEWS. 


A  great  loss  has  befallen  Egyptian  work,  in  many  directions,  by  the 
sudden  death  of  Dr.  James  Herbert  Walker,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P., 
which  took  place  on  July  21.  We  are  sure  that  all  who  knew  him  will 
deeply  regret  so  sad  a  loss.  Those  connected  with  the  British  School  will 
feel  it  the  more,  as  his  official  connection  with  that  body  as  co-Secretary,  since 
its  constitution  in  1905,  had  bound  his  personality  and  his  work  so  closely 
with  the  rising  fortunes  of  the  Society.  His  especial  charge  in  that  work  was 
the  American  branch,  the  correspondence  of  which  was  chiefly  in  his  hands. 
His  loss  will  be  also  personally  felt  at  University  College.  He  had  joined 
the  Egyptian  classes  there  at  the  beginning  of  the  department  in  1892,  where 
he  was  the  most  promising  student  of  Mr.  F.  LI.  Griffith.  After  Mr.  Griffith 
resigned  that  teaching,  his  successor  was  Dr.  Walker,  and  from  1903  until 
this  summer,  a  series  of  students  have  owed  their  interests  in  the  higher 
branches  of  Egyptian  language  and  Coptic  to  the  enthusiasm  and  the  ever- 
patient  teaching  which  he  had  given  them.  Those  who  knew  him  more 
personally  remember  the  constant  help  that  he  always  gave  to  every  call  on 
his  time  or  attention  in  the  most  kind  and  generous  manner.  We  can  but 
repeat  the  words  of  one  who  knew  him  well :  "  I  never  knew  him  say  or  do 
an  unkind  thing.  He  was  a  single-minded,  simple,  honest  English  gentleman, 
whom  it  was  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  to  know.  His  early  death  has  left  an 
aching  in  many  hearts."  Our  deepest  sympathy  is  given  to  Mrs.  Walker 
in  such  a  sudden  and  terrible  blow. 


The  care  of  our  American  branch,  which  has  been  so  suddenly  deprived  of 
the  management  of  our  lamented  Secretary,  Dr.  Walker,  will  in  future  be  taken 
in  charge  by  Mr.  Percival  Hart,  Grove  Lodge,  Highgate,  London,  N. 

The  Annual  Exhibition  of  the  British  School  at  University  College  was 
attended  by  double  the  number  of  visitors  that  have  come  to  any  previous  archaeo- 
logical exhibition.  The  astonishing  view  of  the  jewellery  of  Princess  Sat-hathor 
raised  an  interest  which  spread  far  beyond  those  who  previously  cared  for  Egyptian 
matters.  In  other  directions  also  there  was  a  large  show  of  fine  things,  and  the 
museums  of  places  that  had  helped  have  received  a  good  return. 

The  present  horror  that  threatens  to  submerge  European  civilisation  and  shift 
races  like  the  ancient  migrations,  is  bearing  heavily  on  all  science  and  culture,  and 
will  have  its  effects  for  a  long  time  to  come.  It  has  temporarily  withdrawn  many 
workers  who  were  helping  the  researches  of  the  School. 


Notes  and  News.  191 

Mr.  Brunton  is  in  the  Hospital  Corps  at  Netley. 

Dr.  Amsden  is  medical  officer  of  the  Royal  Sussex  at  Cooden  Beach. 

Mr.  R.  Engelbach  has  joined  the  Artists'  Corps  of  Territorials,  and  his  results 
of  last  year's  work  can  scarcely  be  prepared  until  the  war  is  over. 

Mr.  Battiscoijjbe  Gunn,  who  was  copying  and  translating  the  inscriptions  of 
the  year,  is  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Mr.  Engelbach. 

Mr.  Duncan  Willey,  who  excavated  with  us  last  winter,  is  in  the  R.A.M.C.T. 

Miss  M.  A.  Murray  may  be  called  off  at  any  time,  being  an  organizer  of  the 
Voluntary  Aid  Detachment  of  the  College  Women's  Union  Society. 

Of  our  previous  workers,  Mr.  Horace  Thompson  is  in  the  Oxford  and  Bucks 
Light  Infantry. 

Mr.  Mackay  is  leaving  England  to  continue  the  conservation  of  the  Theban 
tombs. 

Mr.  Quibell  has  now  returned  to  Egypt  to  take  up  his  duties  as  Curator  of  the 
Cairo  Museum. 

Mr.  N.  de  G.  Davies  and  Mrs.  Davies  have  resumed  their  copying  of  the  Theban 
Tombs. 

Mr.  Somers  Clarke  is  also  now  returning  to  Egypt. 

What  may  happen  in  Egypt,  and  what  chance  there  may  be  for  work  there 
next  winter,  no  one  can  yet  foresee.  We  trust  that  M.  Lacau  will  find  that  his 
health,  and  the  conditions  politically,  will  allow  of  his  taking  up  the  burden  of 
administration  which  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  has  now  resigned.  It  is  an  unfortunate 
feature  of  our  present  system  that  scientific  workers,  when  most  able,  are  called 
from  research  to  the  business  administration  of  public  services.  The  foremost 
scholars  in  different  lines  have  all  had  to  sacrifice  science  to  the  details  of  office 
work.  It  ought  to  be  recognised  that  all  office  routine  is  the  province  of  a  lesser 
type  of  mind  than  that  of  the  foremost  in  scientific  work,  and  only  the  decisions 
of  important  questions  should  fall  on  the  specialists  who  may  be  the  leaders  in 
their  own  subjects. 


THE  EGYPTIAN  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

It  is  too  early  in  the  .season  to  collect  detailed  information  regarding  the  winter 
meetings  of  the  branches,  and  the  prospects  of  only  two  of  the  branches  can  be 
mentioned  here.  Several  Hon.  Secretaries  have  expressed  their  conviction  that  it 
is  desirable  to  continue  the  meetings  during  this  winter.  These  quiet  meetings  with 
lectures  and  social  intercourse  are  neither  frivolous  nor  tending  to  expense,  and  we 
must  encourage  the  constructive  side  of  life  in  this  time  of  war. 

London.  (Hon.  Sec,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  temp,  address,  c/o  Edwards  Library,  University 
College,  Gower  Street,  W.C.)— Meetings,  monthly,  at  8  p.m.,  lecture,  8.30  p.m.  Oct.  29,  at 
University  College,  Goner  Street,  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie,  on  "The  Use  of  Metals  in  Egypt." 
Nov.  5,  at  10,  Lower  Grosvenor  Place,  S.W.  (by  kind  invitation  of  Mrs.  Purdon),  the  Lady  William 
Cecil  Baroness  Amherst  of  Hackney,  on  "  E.xcavations  of  Tombs  in  the  Gebel  Qubbet  el-Hawa." 
Dec.  10,  at  29,  Tite  Street,  Chelsea,  S.W.  (by  kind  invitation  of  Mrs.  Percy  Bigland), 
Mrs  Lewis,  D.D.,  on  "The  Sinai  Gospels." 

Hastings.  (Mrs.  Russell  .Morris,  Quarry  Hill  Lodge,  St.  Leonards.)— Dates  fixed  later. 
Major  Davenport,  on  "  Ancient  Egyptian  Jewellery."  Dr.  Spanton,  on  "  The  Egyptian  Water 
Lily."     Rev.  J.  D.  Gray,  on  "  Neolithic  Man."     Mrs.  Court,  on  "  Sign  Language." 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


(       192      ) 


THE  PORTRAITS. 

Two  of  the  best  portrait  figures  are  here  given  to  show  the  entire  difference  in 
style  and  feeling  between  the  Old  Kingdom  and  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

The  statue  of  Ranefer  is  one  of  the  finest  figures  of  the  great  nobles  of  the 
Pyramid  Age.  The  art  of  their  time  has  perhaps  glorified  their  nature ;  yet  an  age 
which  could  support  such  art  must  have  had  magnificent  ideas  and  leaders.  We 
may  therefore  reasonably  look  to  that  splendid  period  as  one  of  the  great  flowering 
times  of  the  human  race,  like  the  age  of  Pericles  or  of  the  Florentines.  In  this 
statue  we  do  not  see  the  expression  of  mental  and  moral  power  only,  as  in  Khufu 
arid  Khafra  ;  but  also  of  intense  activity  of  body,  will,  and  resolution.  Though 
strictly  a  passive  figure  at  rest,  yet  we  see  marvellously  rendered  the  tense  reserve 
of  energy  in  the  whole  air,  the  firm  muscles,  the  decisive  pose,  the  unflinching 
authority  of  a  great  leader  in  a  system,  who  yet  was  not  an  autocrat.  The  statue 
was  found  in  the  tomb  of  Ranefer  at  Saqqareh,  and  is  now  in  the  Cairo  Museum. 

As  a  complete  contrast  look  at  the  statuette  of  an  officer  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty, 
carved  in  ebony,  with  gilt  collar  and  armlets.  In  every  point  it  shows  the  soft, 
self-indulgent,  indecisive  type  of  the  later  age.  The  head  leans  forward,  instead  of 
being  supreme  in  bold  dignity.  The  shoulders  slope  and  round,  the  arms  are  lax 
and  soft.  The  trunk  is  rounded,  with  softer  breast  and  fuller  stomach,  beneath 
which  the  belt  is  pushed  down.  The  legs  are  round  and  not  firmly  planted.  In 
every  detail  is  seen  the  weakness,  the  graceful  refinement,  the  incipient  decline, 
of  a  period  which  attracts  more  by  its  picturesqueness  than  by  its  strength.  The 
figure  was  found  in  i860  in  a  tomb  at  Thebes,  and  is  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum. 


l^^ 


STATUE     OF     RANEFER,     Vth     DYNASTY. 
IN     LIMESTONE.  CAIRO     MUSEUM. 


<v 


STATUETTE    OF    AN     OPFICER.      XVIII     DYNASTY. 
IN    WOOD,  BERLIN    MUSEUM. 


ANCIENT 
EGYPT 


1915. 


Part  I. 


CONTENTS. 


1.  Birds  in  Ancient  Egyptian  Art. 

Charles  Whymper. 

2.  Excavations  at  Saqqara. 

j.  e.  quibell. 

3.  Part  of  a  Coptic  Sermon. 

Sir  Herbert  Thompson. 

4.  The  Metals  in  Egypt. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 

5.  Periodicals  :  — Recueil. 

6.  Reviews  : — 

DussAUD,  Civilizations. 
Hall,  Aegean  Archaeology. 
Quibell,  Tomb  of  Hesy. 
Weigall,  Cleopatra. 

7.  Notes  and  News. 

8.  The  Portraits. 


EDITOR,    PROF  FLINDERS  PETRIE,  F.RS.,  F.B.A. 


Yearly,  7^.  Post  Free. 


Quarterly  Part,  2s. 


MACMILLAN   AND   CO., 
LONDON     AND     NEW     YORK; 

AND 

BRITISH     SCHOOL    OF    ARCHAEOLOGY     IN     EGYPT, 
University  College,  Gower  Street,  London. 


Ancient*  Egypt.     Net  price  of  each  number  from  booksellers  is  2s. 
Subscriptions  for  the  four  quarterly  parts,  prepaid,  post  free,  js.,  are  received  by 
Hon.  Sec.  "Ancient  Egypt"  (H.  Flinders  Petrie),  University  College,  Gower 
Street,  London,  W.C. 
Books  for  review,  papers  offered  for  insertion,  or  news,  should  be  addressed : — 
Editor  of  "  Ancient  Egypt," 

University  College,  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C. 


p 


g 

X 

a 

>- 
-J 
a 
o 

IT 
\U 

I 

uT 

cc 

D 
h 
-I 

> 

O 
lU 

a 
< 
111 

I 

I 

z 

UJ 
Q 

-I 
O 

o 

UJ 

I 
I- 


J 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


BIRDS    IN   ANCIENT   EGYPTIAN   ART. 

{Frontispiece^ 

Some  years  ago,  I  wrote  on  the  subject  of  colour  as  used  by  the  ancient  Egyptians 
in  the  representation  of  living  objects  ;  and  though  now  one  has  seen  so  many 
hundred  more  different  examples  than  then  had  been  available,  I  have  still,  with 
some  regret,  to  restate  my  original  view,  that  we  know  little  as  to  the  rule  that 
dictated  to  the  old  artists  what  colour  they  should  use. 

Light  will  doubtless  be  thrown  on  this  by  Mr.  Howard  Carter's  book  when  it 
is  published.  Those  who  have  been  privileged  to  see  parts  of  it  know  his  extra- 
ordinary powers  of  observation,  exact  illustration,  and  artistic  handling,  which 
make  them  await  the  work  with  the  utmost  interest.  What  one,  however,  almost 
fears  must  necessarily  be  impossible  to  elucidate  is,  why  the  same  bird — or  what 
on  every  method  of  judgment  one  would  say  is  the  same  bird — should  be  in  one 
case  coloured  red,  and  in  another  blue,  while  the  real  colour  in  nature  is  neither 
red  nor  blue.  We  know,  or  seem  to  know,  that  certain  classes  of  objects  were 
always  by  some  convention  to  be  coloured  one  regulation  colour,  for  instance,  wood 
(or  wooden  objects)  are  nearly  always  red,  whilst  water  is  blue ;  but  in  the  matter 
of  birds  there  seems  no  fixed  rule  of  this  sort.  All  are  aware  that,  over  the  vast 
period  of  time  which  one  is  considering,  artists  and  schools  were  succeeding  one 
another  constantly,  and  that  certain  periods  were  artistically  infinitely  preferable 
to  others.  That,  however,  will  not  help  us  over  this  particular  difficulty,  because 
on  the  same  wall,  and  of  the  same  period,  I  have  found  such  different  renderings 
of  the  same  bird  that,  judging  by  the  colour,  you  would  have  to  place  them  as 
.scientifically  different  species.  I  still  remain  in  this  view,  which  was  arrived  at 
long  before  I  had  read  the  following  : — "  In  studying  Egyptian  wall-painting  the 
"  question  immediately  arises  how  far  the  faithfulness  and  realism  of  the  artists  is  to 
"  be  depended  upon.  Their  bad  work  was  often  very  bad  ;  but  their  best  work 
"  also  was  done  principally  with  a  view  to  decorative  effect,  and  thus  we  see,  for 
"  example,  that  the  fins  of  the  fishes  are  often  misplaced,  the  colours  of  a  bird  may 
"  be  taken  from  one  species,  and  the  form  from  another,  while  everything  is 
"  considerably  conventionalised  "  {Bcni  Hasan,  Part  III). 

From  my  own   notes  I   have  selected  some  cases  to    make   this  clear.     The 

first    is   this    figure    of   '^^,    the    Egyptian    vulture    used    alphabetically    as    A. 

In  the  frontispiece,  Fig.  i,  you  have  for  comparison  a  sketch  of  the  actual 
bird,  as  rendered  by  a  modern  draughtsman  from  the  living  example.  In 
Figs.  2,  3,  4,  are  shewn  three  copies  of  this  same  sign  which  were  painted  in 
colour,  each  differing  considerably  the  one  from   the  other,  but  all  three  being 

A 


2  Birds  in  Ancient  Egyptian  Art. 

selected  because  of  the  careful  work  shewn  in  them.  No.  2,  from  the  tomb  of 
Ameny,  Beni  Hasan,  is  coloured  blue,  red,  and  white,  as  indicated  by  lettering. 
The  markings  on  head  and  neck,  which  presumably  represent  the  ruff  of  long  thin 
feathers  which  adorn  the  neck,  are  painted  in  reddish  colour,  as  are  the  beak  and 
the  face,  which  is  bare  skin.  In  nature,  the  ruflf  of  feathers  is  pure  white  with  no 
suggestion  of  red,  and  the  bare  skin  of  face,  with  the  base  of  the  beak,  is  bright 
yellow.     The  white  parts  in  all  three  figures  are  correct  as  in  nature — but  the 


2. 


/y^ 


1K&.U5S 


YcUovir 


^»K'^l-<'5»  Xnliour 


wings  in  this  Fig.  2  are  blue — with  black  primaries,  and  there  is  a  curious  white 
square  on  the  point  of  the  wing,  which  one  is  most  uncertain  about.  In  nature 
the  wing  is,  as  you  see  by  Fig.  i,  white,  with  dark  grey  secondaries,  which  at 
a  distance  look  absolutely  black,  and  with  black  primaries.  In  No.  3,  which  is 
from  the  inside  of  a  painted  wood  coffin  of  the  IlIrd  to  IVth  dynasties,  the  bird 
has  what  looks  like  a  crest  of  feathers  on  top  and  back  of  head  and  is  shewn  with 
quite  bright  green  wings,  and  its  legs  are  yellow,  as  they  are  in  Fig.  4,  from  a  Xllth 


w-Whitel 


dynasty  tomb.  In  nature  the  legs  are  a  sort  of  chalky  pink-red.  In  Figs.  5,  6,  are 
shewn  two  wooden  hawks  ;  Fig.  5  is  in  the  Petrie  Collection,  Fig.  6  is  my  own ; 
both  are  practically  as  far  as  shape  and  size  go  identical ;  but  the  colouring,  as 
I  have  shewn  by  my  lettered  diagrammatic  drawing,  is  about  as  markedly  different 


as  well  could  be  imagined. 


Birds  in  Ancient  Egyptian  Art.  o 

Incidentally  most  will  agree  that  the  lot  of  the  poor  bird  expert,  who  is  called 
in  to  name  certain  birds,  is  not  quite  a  happy  one,  and  the  writer  has  had  more 
than  one  experience,  where  the  questioner  has  looked  upon  our  cautious  answer  as 
a  mere  subterfuge  of  ignorance,  and  seemed  doubtful  if  one  were  not  posing  as 
having  knowledge  while  being  really  a  regular  fraud.  Still  one  goes  on,  and  does 
not  regret  the  long  hours  given  to  this  side  of  Egypt's  story  ;  ever}-  season 
something  new  crops  up,  and  onl}-  this  j'ear  Prof  Petrie  asked  me  to  look  at 
a  very  perfect  little  work  of  art. 


7.  Night-Jar.    From  Nature. 


8.  IvoRV  Carving  of  Night-Jar.     Garnet  Eye. 
Prehistoric. 


This  little  ivory  is  just  about  2  inches  long,  and  is  in  no  way  remarkable  for 
any  detail  of  markings  of  wings  or  feathers.  The  first  point  seen  is  that  the  eyes 
are  of  a  difterent  colour  and  substance  to  the  rest.  They  are  small  beads  of  garnet, 
with  the  darker  iris  plainly  shewn,  and  the  same  dark  colour  surrounding  the  eye 
gives  the  appearance  of  the  heavy  eyelids  peculiar  to  the  bird. 

Now  it  may  be  asked,  after  looking  at  our  two  illustrations.  Fig.  8  being  of  the 
little  ivory  itself,  and  Fig.  7  a  sketch  of  my  own  of  the  bird  from  nature, — whatever 
is  it  you  see  in  this  ivory  to  so  admire  ?  My  answer  is,  first,  that  of  all  birds  I  know 
the  nightjar  is  peculiar  in  this  identical  squatting  position  ;  and  that,  when  seen, 
the  eye  is  the  most  marked  thing  visible.  Indeed,  it  is  a  commonplace  amongst 
field  naturalists  that  it  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to  discern  this  bird  at  all,  as  it 
lies  or  squats  on  the  ground,  possibly  not  a  yard  away  from  you,  until  you  catch 
sight  of  the  great  luminous  eye.  This  is  because  it  crouches  rigidly  motionless, 
and  because  of  the  delicate  markings — blotches  and  pencillings  of  brown  and  grey 
and  buff,  which  harmonize  and  blend  with  the  surrounding  soil  and  stones,  so  that  it 

A  2 


4  Birds  in  Ancient  Egyptian  Art. 

looks  merely  like  a  rounded  bit  of  the  adjoining  earth.  The  old  time  artist  knew 
this  very  certainly,  and  made  a  point  of  it.  Then  the  ne.xt  peculiarity  is  that  the 
broad  head  ever  lies  close  in  on  the  shoulders,  and  the  body  and  tail  make  one 
continuous  line,  with  the  feet  hidden  underneath,  and  in  broad  simple  fashion  all 
these  characteristics  are  given,  so  that  though  in  white  ivory  which  cannot  shew  the 
delicacy  of  pattern  of  its  brown  and  buff  plumage,  it  is  possible  to  at  once  identify 
it  as  being  meant  for  the  Egyptian  nightjar  {Caprimulgus  aegyptius).  This  form  is 
an  inch  smaller  than  the  European  species,  which  is  a  comparatively  rare  visitor  to 
Egypt.  And  the  Egyptian  bird  is  again  a  rarer  visitor  still  to  our  own  country  ; 
only  one  case  is  known  authentically,  and  that  was  in  1883,  when,  with  regret  it  has 
to  be  stated,  it  was  promptly  shot;  this  was  in  the  heart  of  England, 
Nottinghamshire. 

Both  species  are  marked  with  very  similar  delicate  grey  buff  and  brown 
blotches  and  pencillings, — but  our  English  one  has  the  markings  rather  more 
positively,  and  distinctly  darker  blotches.  Its  curious  note,  which  is  perhaps  the 
most  singular  of  all  our  native  birds,  once  heard  is  never  forgotten.  It  harmonizes 
completely  with  the  wild  moorlands  and  waste  places  that  it  loves — and  loves  so 
consistently  that  it  returns  annually,  as  a  summer  visitor,  to  the  exact  spot  where  it 
nested  the  previous  year,  and  where  probably  itself  was  born  from  the  eggs  laid  on 
the  bare  ground  under  some  mass  of  bracken. 

Two  outstanding  points,  which  are  to  the  artist  points  of  great  merit,  are,  first, 
the  extraordinary  individuality  of  all  Egyptian  art  from  any  other  art ;  and,  second, 
that  quite  apart  from  the  actual  scale  of  the  work  of  art  (as  in  this  little  gem  of  a 
sculptured  nightjar),  it  is  ever — ^in  studio  parlance — "big."  If  you  have  any  doubt 
about  the  first,  try  and  paint  or  sculpture  any  bird  or  inanimate  object  to  make  it 
look  like  the  work  of  some  good  Egyptian  period.  Your  first  essay  will  at  once 
reveal  to  an  expert  that  it  is  done  by  Western  hands ;  there  will  be  some  tell-tale 
peculiarities,  of  which  you  yourself  are  quite  unconscious,  that  will  certainly,  as  we 
say,  "give  the  show  away."  Even  if  you  simply  attempt  to  copy  direct  from  some 
Egyptian  work,  you  will  be  astounded  at  the  difficulty  of  getting  just  the  identical 
type  of  line  and  contour  that  is  everlastingly  to  be  found  in  everything  they  did. 
Then  the  other  point  is  equally  certain,  that  theirs  was  the  godlike  gift  of  making 
everything  big.  Take  those  little  wee  statuette  figures,  only  an  inch  or  inch  and 
half  high,  they  are  still  great, — big  with  the  same  dignity,  reserve,  and  masterly 
seizing  in  their  own  way  the  simple  necessary  contours  and  broad  forms  and 
masses.  Needless  to  add,  here  reference  is  only  being  made  to  the  great  and  good 
periods.  Their  bad  work,  as  already  has  been  pointed  out,  is  very  bad  ;  and  it  is 
curious  that  bad  work  is  points  easier  to  copy  than  good.  Some  of  the  work  of  the 
worst  periods  might  really  just  be  the  work  of  a  badly-taught  board  school  child  of 
to-day,  the  resemblance,  indeed,  often  is  really  striking.  But  for  the  rest — and  it  is 
a  very  big  remainder — all  their  work  ever  has  this  individuality  and  this  bigness, 
just  as  this  little  bit  of  ivory  is  a  complete  work  of  art,  and  the  cleverest  representa- 
tion of  a  nightjar  that  I  have  ever  seen. 

To. go  back  to  our  frontispiece,  in  old  books  of  travel  this  bird  is  often  referred 
to  as  f'haraoh's  Chicken  ;  travellers  tell  how  it  was  to  be  seen  in  every  village 
walking  about  amongst  the  domestic  poultry,  and  describe  how  it  would  eat  and 
clean  up  the  most  unsavoury  filth  and  nastincss,  that  even  a  poor  skinny  Egyptian 
fowl  would  scorn.  The  name  has  some  interest,  because  nowadays  all  that  has 
changed,  and  in  all  the  years  I  can  remember  Egypt  I  have  only  once  seen  it. 
This  was  at  some  small  settlement  of  huts — not  worthy  even  of  the  name  of  a 


Birds  hi  Ancient  Egyptian  Art.  5 

village — midway  on  the  old  road  between  Keneh  and  Koseir.  From  a  group  of  what 
at  a  distance  looked  like  all  geese,  two  birds  flew  up  and  circled  lazily  round,  and 
I  saw  they  were  Egyptian  vultures.  The  geese  did  not  seem  disturbed  or  notice 
them,  and  I  remember  the  whole  incident  because  of  the  unsuitability  of  the  place, 
a  desert,  for  a  water-loving  bird  like  the  goose.  Still  Egypt  is  full  of  these 
surprises,  as  all  1*avellers  must  have  been  startled  to  hear  for  the  first  time  the 
"  goble,  goble,  goble,"  of  the  ubiquitous  turkey-cock  from  the  roof  of  some  high 
building  in  town  or  city. 

It  would  be  most  interesting  to  bird  lovers  if  we  could  reach  some  smallest 
direct  knowledge  of  what  reason  dictated  their  choice  of  birds  as  hieroglyphs,  which 
seem  to  us  to  have  no  possible  connection  with  the  ideas  they  are  supposed  to 
embody.  Why  should  a  vulture,  which  is  the  most  repulsive  looking  and  most 
foul  feeding  bird,  and  far  from  the  best  and  highest  type  of  good  parent,  be  used  as 
a  symbol  of  motherhood,  with  all  its  delicate  and  sacred  associations?  Again,  why 
should  an  ibis  be  chosen  to  head  the  embodiment  of  the  great  master  mind  and 
deity  that  presided  over  the  arts,  letters  and  literature?  Above  all  why  a  duck  or 
a  goose  should  be  chosen  as  the  sacred  and  royal  symbol  of  an  earthly  monarch's 
sonship  with  the  greatest  of  their  gods  ?  In  not  one  of  these  three  leading  cases 
can  an  ornithologist  see  the  slightest  suitability  or  propriety  whatever.  Although 
one  has  to  record  that,  it  may  well  be  that  nevertheless  there  may  be  some  sound 
reason,  which  in  due  course  will  be  gradually  discovered,  and  that  is  the  hope  and 
inspiration  of  every  scientific  worker  in  this  particular  furrow  of  the  great  fascinating 
field  of  Egyptology. 

Charles  Whymper. 

[Unusual  as  the  golden-headed  vulture  may  be  in  most  places,  it  is  still  frequent 
in  others,  as  at  Dendereh,  where  I  have  counted  thirteen  all  within  a  stone's  throw 
of  our  courtyard  ;  they  frequented  that  as  they  always  found  there  a  peaceful  supply 
of  scraps.— W.  M.  F.  P.] 


A  3 


(    6    ) 


EXCAVATIONS   AT   SAQQARA. 

The  excavations  of  the  past  season  at  Saqqara  were  conducted  in  a  quarter  of  the 
necropolis  well  known  to  every  visitor,  close  to  the  tombs  of  Mereruka  and 
Kaqemni  and  to  the  pyramid  of  Teta.  When  these  tombs  were  formerly  cleared 
the  use  of  light  railways  had  not  begun,  and  all  the  sand  and  stone,  carried  in 
baskets  on  boys'  heads,  had  been  banked  up  in  close  proximity  to  the  mastabas. 
Underneath  this  equally  good  inscribed  tombs  might  possibly  lie  concealed. 
Accordingly,  in  the  last  two  seasons,  in  accordance  with  the  wish  of  Sir  Gaston 
Maspero,  a  beginning  has  been  made  with  the  task  of  clearing  a  considerable  space, 
including  the  area  between  and  surrounding  the  accessible  tombs.  No  great 
mastaba  has  yet  been  found  ;  a  large  bulk  of  top  stuff  had  first  to  be  moved,  then 
three  well  defined  layers  of  interments  had  to  be  worked  through  before  the  Old 
Kingdom  tombs  were  reached,  and  in  the  limited  area  as  yet  cleared  to  ground 
level  only  one  tomb  of  the  earliest  period  has  been  found  in  good  condition. 

The  uppermost  layer  was  of  Roman  date,  of  the  3rd  century.  The  super- 
structures were  oblong  benches  of  brick,  lying  north  and  south,  higher  at  one  end 
than  the  other,  covered  with  plaster,  and  sometimes  decorated  with  simple  patterns 
in  red  and  black  paint.  In  the  raised  end  was  a  niche,  in  the  back  of  which  there 
remained,  in  one  case,  a  human  head  roughly  painted  in  red.  The  graves  were 
shallow,  about  30  inches  deep ;  in  them  lay  bodies  fully  extended,  loosely  wrapped 
and  bandaged.  There  were  hardly  any  small  objects.  A  coin  of  Marcus  Aurelius 
had  been  placed  in  one  child's  mouth  ;  this  was  found  in  the  previous  year  (191 2-1 3). 
Two  interesting  pieces  of  faience — a  sphinx  and  a  vase  with  decoration  in  relief — 
and  a  marble  head  of  a  boy,  a  good  piece  of  portraiture,  were  the  most  important 
single  objects. 

In  the  bodies  themselves  the  most  obvious  point  of  interest  was  the  curiously 
bad  condition  of  the  teeth ;  not  only  were  these  generally  worn  down  veiy  flat,  but 
decayed  molars,  and  jaws  almost  devoid  of  teeth,  were  very  common.  The  contrast 
between  these  people  and  the  present  population  of  the  villages  is,  in  this  matter, 
most  striking ;  but  of  course  our  interments  may  have  been  those  of  a  poor  class 
of  townspeople  from  Memphis,  and  not  countryfolk  at  all. 

In  the  tombs,  and  still  more  between  them,  at  this  level,  a  considerable 
collection  of  pots  was  made,  and  these  were  carefully  drawn  and  worked  up  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hayter,  who,  this  year  as  last  rendered  us  most  valuable  volunteer 
assistance  in  every  way. 

The  second  layer  of  bodies  was  at  about  three  feet  depth  below  the  Romans. 
They  were  oriented  at  right  angles  to  those  above  them,  the  heads  being  to  the 
west.  Here  again  a  poor  class  of  the  population  was  alone  represented.  Some 
hundreds  had  to  be  examined,  so  closely  did  they  lie  together,  and  dated  objects 
were  non-existent. 


Excavations  at  Saqqara.  7 

The  coffins  were  of  anthropoid  form,  but  very  roughly  made  of  planks  daubed 
over  with  mud  :  the  faces  were  sometimes  carved  in  wood  and  pegged  on,  but  more 
often  moulded  in  clay  roughly  painted.  The  class  is  but  too  well  known  to  diggers, 
and  is  most  difficult  to  date. 

The  third  layer  contained  fewer  bodies  and  was  less  uniform  in  type.  Most 
were  in  oblong  boxes,  of  greater  height  than  width.  One  group  with  gable  lids, 
and  bands  of  red  and  yellow  (a  red  central  stripe  with  yellow  edges),  was  well 
defined.     All  these  were  probably  of  the  early  New  Empire. 

One  of  the  square-ended  plain  coffins  contained  an  unexpected  prize.  There 
were  two  bodies  in  the  coffin,  both  wrapped  in  plain  cloth,  and  without  so  much  as 
a  bead  or  a  pot  to  reward  our  search.  The  cloth  was  in  fairly  good  condition, 
however,  and  as  I  threw  one  bundle  of  it  aside  it  broke  and  disclosed,  to  my  surprise, 
the  head  of  a  small  wooden  statuette.  It  is  about  2\  inches  high  and  represents  a 
very  young  boy,  hardly  more  than  a  baby.  Two  of  the  ordinary  flower-shaped 
carnelian  beads  were  suspended  by  gold  wire  to  the  ears :  they  are  oddly  out  of 
scale,  the  child's  earring  being  as  long  as  his  forearm  ;  but  the  sculpture  is  very 
delicate  and  subtle,  and  such  a  charming  study  of  a  child  is  certainly  of  great  rarity. 
Even  in  the  Louvre  the  work  would  attract  attention ;  in  our  scantier  series  at 
Cairo  it  is  very  valuable. 

Another  piece  of  fine  sculpture  was  a  wooden  spoon,  with  an  openwork  handle 
representing  a  girl  standing  in  a  boat  and  gathering  papyrus ;  this  was  only  in  fair 
condition.  Wooden  objects  at  Saqqara  are  rarely,  if  ever,  in  the  perfect  state  so 
usual  at  Thebes. 

At  a  still  lower  level  was  a  set  of  boats  from  a  Middle  Kinpfdom  tomb,  and 
.soon  afterwards  an  untouched  shaft  of  the  same  period  was  discovered.  It  had 
been  sunk  close  by  a  large  mastaba  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  masonry  of  which 
formed  one  of  its  sides.*  The  massive  wooden  sarcophagi  were  in  the  shaft  itself: 
the  model  boats,  granaries  and  workshops  in  recesses  at  the  base.  There  were  no 
objects  of  intrinsic  value,  but  the  staffs  and  bows,  the  cartonnage  masks  and  the 
sandals  inside  the  coffins,  and  the  models  and  statuettes  outside,  formed  a  rich 
group,  and  were  in  good  condition.  The  types  are  well  enough  known,  wooden 
boats  propelled  by  oars,  papyrus  boats  which  were  paddled,  groups  of  brewers,  and 
granaries.  Less  common  is  the  carpenter's  shop  with  a  large  set  of  model  tools, 
and  the  model  loom  is  perhaps  unique.  The  canopic  vases  had  wooden  heads,  all 
human,  three  representing  men,  one  a  vvoman. 

The  names  on  the  two  coffins  were  Anpu-emhat  and  Nekh-hetuser.  Each  of 
the  groups  when  exposed  in  a  museum  necessarily  takes  a  great  deal  of  space,  and 
it  is  very  possible  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  keep  both  of  them  at  Cairo 
permanently. 

This  completes  the  tale  of  the  interments.  Of  important  superstructures  we 
discovered  two.  At  the  lowest  level  was  the  mastaba  of  yet  another  Ptahshepses  : 
it  lies  close  to  Kaqemni,  to  the  north.  The  stela  is  a  fine  block  of  stone,  with  a 
rather  roughly  incised  inscription  ;  perhaps  it  had  been  usurped.  The  chamber  is 
of  crude  brick,  covered  with  mud  plaster  and  painted.  The  scenes  are  commonplace, 
only  the  slaughter  of  oxen,  but  the  colours  are  rather  well  preserved,  and  the  dark 
slaty  background  is  striking.  It  is  regrettable  that  the  tomb  cannot  be  left  long 
open  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  damp  air  in  winter  would  soon  disintegrate 
the  plaster  unless  it  were  protected  by  sand. 

The  second  tomb  stood  above  this ;  it  must  have  been  an  extensive  structure 
of  the  late  XVIIIth  or  XlXth  dynasty,  and  commemorated  a  certain  Aapudu. 

A  4 


8  ■  Excavations  at  Saqqara. 

The  walls  were  of  brick,  faced  with  stone,  but  stood  only  a  yard  high  when  we 
found  them,  and  had  been  stripped  of  all  but  half  a  dozen  blocks.  These,  however, 
were  of  merit.  There  i.s  a  stela  with  a  long  text,  a  hymn  to  Ra  ;  and  another  stela, 
brightly  coloured,  with  the  figures  of  the  whole  family  depicted  on  it.  Two  other 
blocks,  which  fit  together,  show  a  funerary  scene — boats  upon  a  lake,  and  shrines  (?) 
around  it.  More  interesting  artistically  is  a  scene  of  led  horses,  drawn  with  great 
vigour  and  spirit. 

There  must  once  have  been  a  great  deal  of  this  fine  New  Kingdom  work  at 
Saqqara,  but  it  lay  too  accessibly,  and  the  Copts  used  it  as  a  quarry,  building  the 
whole  monastery  of  St.  Jeremias  from  it. 

J.   E.   QUIBELL. 


(     9     ) 


PART   OF   COPTIC    SERMON. 


[I  have  asked  Sir  Herbert  Thompson  to  allow  the  publication  of  this,  in  hope  that  the  author 
of  it  may  be  identified. — W.  M.  F.  P.] 

The  following  text  is  written  on  a  strip  of  vellum  8^  inches  high  by  4  inches  at 
the  widest  point,  in  a  single  column  on  obverse  and  reverse.  The  fragment  is 
complete  at  top  and  bottom,  but  has  been  torn  away  on  the  left-hand  edge  of  the 
obverse  from  what  was  originally  probably  a  page  with  two  columns  of  writing. 
One  or  more  letters  have  been  lost  from  the  beginning  of  each  line  of  the  obverse, 
and  from  the  end  of  each  line  of  the  reverse.  I  have  filled  up  most  of  the  gaps, 
but  some  of  the  restorations  are  conjectural. 

The  text  is  apparently  the  close  of  a  sermon,  but  I  have  not  succeeded  in 
tracing  its  origin  : — 


ObV.     .   UUp]p(-   KlUCAKIIC  BU).\ 

eunATjuTcou    en.viUHU 
enojTBM  OTn  ^nu 
umJto^ujt  eooov 

,  .   ]MTUMTe^COT 
MAJAIKOKJ   eAWtOO 
UnAJlABOAOC  GCtOlie 
UUOJM  AMUKI  A(3   KJpiUG 

eTJAAM   MeMAIUU>piA 
UnJoOT  XBKAC  MMenAI 
^tojno   UUOM   UAp(3MOp 

ua]  mcaca  miu  atuj  om 

UAJpOMKU)  MCtUM   MU 

nJAeoc  mu  utHuotxp. 

n]B<).\   UUOM   MTOnOIOTUIA 
Kl]TUKITp(:UUAO  Until 
UA  Xt3KAC  tro  <JM(JUATe 
MJMAKAeOM  eTMA^tO 

n]e  eiTMToxApic  um 

TJUWTUAiptOUO   QnCJM 

xjoeic  Tu  n«5\G  ncwctoTHp 
nA]i  fiB[o].\  eiTOOT[q]  epefj 
oo]t  iii[u  Jnpenei  MAq  um 

.  .  .   UMTOnpOCKTMIICIC 
UMjTOTX'ApiOTIA 


Rev.   UMneq6iujTM[ArA 
eoc  uwrTeKiA  o[tot 

AAB  TBTpiAC  [(iTeM 
OTUWTOTAa[b   MTU 
MTTOTA  OC[2M 
OTTpiAC  MAT[cI> 

XM  ATjyiBe  [ocp 
VjIJue  unTH[pq   m 

MATne   U(3MM[a 
HKA?  TOMOT  a[TUJ 
MOTOei^   MIU   [^AM 

eM62  eMGMe? 

2AUHM 


lO  Part  of  Coptic  Sermon. 

Translation : — 

"...  [lest  the  ties  ?]  of  the  planks  [be  ?]  loosened  [before  ?]  we  have  reached 
the  harbour,  the  hull  (?)'  [being]  laden  with  bad  merchandise  (?)  .  .  .  unjust 
merchandise,  we  having  given  occasion  to  the  devil  to  mock  us.  But  we  weep- 
and  we  undertake  to  yield  us  up  to  punishments  to-day  (?)  in  order  that  this  may 
not  happen  to  us.  Let  us  hasten  (?)^  in  every  direction  and  also  leave  behind  us 
all  passions,  and  let  us  cast  away  from  us  desire  of  riches  in  this  place,*  so  that 
also  we  may  obtain  the  good  things  that  shall  come  to  us  through  the  grace  and 
loving  kindness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  through  whom  all  honour  is 
due  to  Him  and  .  .  .  and  worship  and  thanks,  together  with  His  Good  Father  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,"  the  Trinity  in  a  holiness  of  Unity''  which  is  [in  ?]  an  unfailing  and 
unchanging  Trinity,  which  ruleth  the  universe  of  things  in  heaven  and  things  on 
earth  now  and  at  all  times  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 

'   1-  OTeKIT(?) 

■-'  Probably  the  scribe's  error  for  UApGUpiUH,  "let  us  weep  and  let  us  undertake,"  etc. 

=  1.  opUA  (?)  ;  one  would  rather  expect  20pUA. 

'  Or,  of  this  place,  i.e.,  this  world.  ^  1.  n«;nKIA.  »  1.  UMTOTA. 

Herbert  Thompson. 


Part  of  Coptic  Sermon. 


II 


Page  of  a  Coptic  Sermon. 


(      12      ) 


THE    METALS    IN    EGYPT. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  the  introduction  and  use  of  the  various  metals  in  Egypt 
had  been  sufficiently  dealt  with  in  original  works  and  compilations ;  but  frequent 
mis-statements  that  are  met  with  show  that  a  summary  of  the  matter  is  needed. 
Dating  will  be  referred  here  entirely  to  Egyptian  dynasties,  to  avoid  the  confusion 
that  has  arisen  from  arbitrary  shortening  of  periods. 

Copper  is  the  earliest  metal  of  which  we  know  anything  in  Egypt.  It  occurs 
in  the  oldest  prehistoric  burials  of  Sequence  Date  30,  while  gold,  silver,  and  lead 
have  not  been  yet  found  before  their  appearance  in  the  beginning  of  the  second 
prehistoric  age,  S.D.  42.  The  nearest  important  source  of  copper  was  in  Sinai, 
where  100,000  tons  of  copper  slag,  in  the  Wady  Nasb  alone,  shows  what  a  large 
industry  was  carried  on  there.  Later,  the  more  distant  source  of  the  North  Syrian 
mines  yielded  a  supply  to  Egypt,  as  seen  in  the  tribute  from  Alashiya  or  Asi ; 
probably  still  later  in  origin  was  the  overseas  supply  from  Cyprus,  which  Dussaud 
does  not  place  till  after  the  1st  dynasty.  Unfortunately  there  are  very  few  analyses 
of  metal  and  of  ores  in  different  neighbouring  countries  for  comparison  with  those 
in  Egypt.  At  least  we  may  note  that  a  piece  of  prehistoric  copper  contained 
r55  per  cent,  zinc  and  only  "38  of  tin  (Naqadeh),  while  no  zinc  occurs  in  Cypriote 
copper  tools.  Copper  was  certainly  very  scarce  at  first,  as  only  small  pins  are 
found,  with  the  top  turned  over  in  a  roll,  probably  to  secure  it  by  a  string  (Fig.  i). 
Such  a  pin  was  found  with  a  body  buried  in  a  goat  skin,  without  any  linen,  of  the 
earliest  type  of  burial.  The  harpoon  (Figs.  2,  3)  and  small  chisel  of  copper  both 
came  into  use  in  the  first  prehistoric  age.  The  metal  became  commoner  continuouslj- 
during  the  second  prehistoric  age,  as  shown  by  the  increasing  size  of  the  tools ; 
the  adzes  and,  lastly,  axes  came  in,  reaching  the  full  weight  of  later  times  at  the 
close  of  the  prehistoric  (Figs.  4,  5,  6). 

In  drawing  conclusions  we  must  not  presume  that  we  have  all  the  means  of 
judging;  our  material  is  extremely  imperfect,  as  we  repeatedly  find  that  only  a 
single  example  of  some  form  is  known  to  us.  Only  three  Egyptian  prehistoric 
copper  daggers  are  known  (Naqadeh  and  El  Amrah)  ;  only  one  prehistoric  copper 
spear-head  has  been  found  (Tarkhan).  The  copper  helmets  of  early  Babylonia 
(Enneatum)  and  of  Crete  (Haghia  Triada)  are  only  known  from  sculptures,  and, 
without  these,  we  should  never  have  suspected  that  such  forms  were  at  all  early. 
The  archaeological  record  is  as  imperfect  as  the  geological,  and  whole  classes  of 
products  have  dropped  out  of  knowledge.  Hence  it  is  only  when  we  have  a  large 
amount  of  remains  in  our  hands  of  one  age  that  we  can  suppose  that  we  have  any 
fair  idea  about  it. 

The  first  dynastj'  marks  the  greatest  size  of  copper  tools.  The  largest  knife 
and  largest  adze  (i2i  inches)  are  of  that  age  (Fig.  4,  Tarkhan) ;  even  the  great 
adze  ( 1 2_. inches),  which  a  boat  builder  is  shown  using  at  Meydum  {Mediiin  xi), 
is  scarcely  as  large.  Exactly  the  same  form  has  been  found  in  Cyprus  (MVRES, 
Catalogue,  501),  but  smaller  (8  inches,  see  Richter-Cartailhac  plate).  As  the  form 
hardly  comes  in  the  Egyptian  series  of  adzes,  and  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
exported  from  Egypt  to  a  copper  region,  it  seems  that  Cypriote  copper  had  reached 
Egypt  by  the  1st  dynasty.  In  this  age  a  large  use  was  made  of  copper  wire,  which 
was  produced  by  cutting  strips  of  thin  sheet  copper  and  hammering  them  round. 


Tlie  Metals  in  Egypt. 


n 


3  :  7 


Copi'ER  AND  Bronze  Work. 


1.  Pin,  Early  Prehistoric.     2,  3.     Harpoons,  Prehistoric. 

4.  .\uzE,  Cypriote,  1st  Dynasty.     5.  Adze  of  "  Sa  Neit,"  1st  Dynasty. 

6.  Axe  of  "  Du-qa,"  1st  Dynasty  (Royal  Tombs,  I,  LXIII,  W.  46). 

7.  Adze  of  "  Snefru-mer-hezt,  Shemsu,"  IVth  Dynasty. 

8.  Chisel  of  ".Senior  Miner,  Ambu,"  XIIth  Dynasty? 

9.  Chiskl,  XVIIIth  Dynasty?    All  above  Copper. 

10.  Hollow  Cast  Bronze  King,  side  broken  away. 

11.  Thin  Cast  Figure,  Bronze,  j<i,-iNCH  thick. 


14 


The  Metals  in  Eg)'pt. 


Such  was  applied  to  fasten  together  boxes,  to  unite  horn  bracelets,  and  even  to 
secure  large  glazed  tiles  to  a  wall.  Four  samples  of  copper  from  the  Royal 
Tombs  each  contained  a  little  bismuth,  about  i  per  cent,  in  a  chisel ;  a  very  small 
amount  is  enough  to  harden  copper  considerably  (Dr.  Gladstone).  The  adze, 
Fig.  6,  is  dated  to  the  close  of  the  Illrd  dynasty  by  the  name  Snefru-mer-hezt. 


crn 


12.  FoL'R  Mex  Beating  Copper.    Man  Finishing  Copper  Bowl. 
Finished  Copper  Vases  in  Background. 

In  the  Old  Kingdom  the  casting  and  beating  of  copper  was  fully  developed; 
scenes  are  shown  of  the  beating  out  of  bowls  (Fig.  12),  and  the  great  statue  of  Pepy 
and  his  son  (see  portrait  at  end)  is  of  beaten  plates.  For  the  analysis,  showing  it 
to  be  almost  pure  copper,  see  Dendereh,  61. 

Of  the  Middle  Kingdom  are  many  fine  tools ;  four  analyses  of  these  from 
Kahun  show  them  to  be  nearly  pure  copper.  Tin  is  only  i  per  cent.,  excepting 
2  per  cent,  in  a  chisel ;  arsenic  is  4  per  cent,  in  an  axe,  but  very  little  elsewhere ; 
antimony  and  iron  are  only  slight  impurities  {Illahun,  12);  also  in  a  piece  of  sheet 
copper,  of  the  same  age,  there  was  only  i  per  cent,  of  tin  {Dendereh,  61).  It  is, 
therefore,  puzzling  to  find  in  analyses  of  Berthelot  a  large  amount  of  tin  in  four 
Old  and  Middle  Kingdom  specimens.  Either  there  were  errors  in  settling  the  age 
of  the  samples,  or,  perhaps,  as  they  were  small  objects,  they  were  cast  in  shape, 
and  the  more  fusible  alloy  was  used  rather  than  the  plain  copper  which  was  beaten 
for  the  tools. 

In  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  bronze  came  into  common  use,  as  will  be  noted 
farther  on  ;  but  copper  continued  to  be  wrought  for  large  beaten  vessels  in  all 
periods,  down  to  the  present  time. 

Examples  of  the  refinement  of  casting  are  shown  in  Fig.  lo,  a  hollow  ring, 
attached  to  some  furniture,  and  now  broken  away  round  the  outside ;  also  in 
Fig.  II,  part  of  a  statuette  shewing  the  metal  only  a  fiftieth  of  an  inch  thick  over 
the  ash  core.  The  heavy  metal  chisels  were  cast  in  open  moulds  of  pottery,  Fig.  13  ; 
in  Fig.  14  is  a  chisel  from  a  similar  mould. 

Gold  is  generally  credited  with  being  the  earliest  metal  used,  and  though  it 
has  not  yet  been  found  in  the  first  prehistoric  age,  that  may  be  due  to  the  graves 
having  been  completely  ransacked  for  it.  It  is  well  known  that  the  eastern  desert 
and  Nubia  were  gold-producing  countries  down  to  Roman  times  ;  and  whether 
the  metal  was  named  nub  from  the  country,  or  the  country  from  the  metal,  is  an 
open  question.  Large  quantities  of  gold  rings  were  brought  down  as  tribute  in 
the  XVllIth  dynasty.     Other  sources  were,  however, 'used  in  the  Old  Kingdom, 


The  Metals  in  Egypt. 


15 


as  is  shown  by  the  mixture  of  silver,  forming  electrum.  Such  native  alloy  is  found 
in  the  Asia  Minor  stream  gold  (Pactolus,  etc.)  ;  and  as  emery  and  obsidian  came 
from  the  Aegean  in  prehistoric  times,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  electrum  would  also 


13.  Pottery  Mould  for  Casting  Chisels. 

14.  Bronze  Chisel,  from  such  Mould,  XVIIIth  Dvnasty. 

15.  Lead  Figure,  Prehistoric. 

16.  Lead  Net  Sinkers,  XVIHth  Dynasty. 


arrive.  The  alloy  with  silver  was  recognised  as  different  from  7iHb,  gold,  hating 
the  name  usvi,  or  zom,  which  is  given  in  the  Ilird  dynasty  {^Mcdiivi  xiii),  and  as 
early  as  Aha  in  the  1st  dynasty  {Royal  Tombs  II,  x,  2).     The  examples  are : — 

Gold.      Silver. 


1st  dynasty. 

Zet 

80 

13 

Royal  Tombs  I 

»i 

Semerkhet  ... 

84 

13 

»»             » 

»> 

Qa 

84 

13 

»)             >» 

Ilnd  dynasty. 

Khasekhemui 

78 

17 

Dr.  Gladstone. 

Vlth  dynasty 

78 

18 

Dendereli,  61. 

I» 

82 

16 

M 

If 

92 

4 

(Berthelot.) 

Much  as  gold  has  been  sought  for  in  the  cemeteries,  some  is  still  found  in 
almost  every  place  that  is  excavated.  The  principal  examples,  put  in  historical 
order  from  our  own  work,  are  :  Naqadeh,  prehistoric  beads  ;  Royal  Tombs,  Aha  bar, 
Zer  jewellery,  Khasekhemui  sceptre  and  vases  ;  Koptos,  bangle  ;  Riqqeh,  pectoral ; 
Lahun,  great  group  of  royal  jewellery  ;  Nubt,  gold  plated  scarabs  ;  Qurneh,  mummj' 
with  jewellery  ;  Gurob,  gold  pin  ;  Ehnasya,  gold  statuette,  Pef-du-bast ;  Defenneh, 
Ra  statuette,  handle  of  tray,  and  much  fragmentary ;  Memphis,  Hathor  head, 
granulated  earrings  ;  and  Naukratis,  Roman  jewellery.  Of  course,  it  is  not  found 
in  excavations  where  the  workmen  are  not  properly  rewarded. 


l6  The  Metals  in  Egypt. 

Gold  was  largely  used  for  gilding,  covering  entire  tops  of  obelisks  and  whole 
doors.  The  sheet  gold  weighs  about  one  grain  to  a  square  inch,  which  is  about 
fifty  times  as  thick  as  modern  gold  leaf. 

Silver  is  found  coming  into  use  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  prehistoric 
civilisation,  with  other  Asiatic  products.  It  was  used  for  a  cap  of  ajar,  a  spoon, 
and  other  small  objects.  Later,  some  were  placed  in  the  tomb  of  Semerkhet,  of 
which  traces  of  chloride  remained  after  it  had  been  robbed.  Some  silver  jewellery 
is  found  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  such  as  the  royal  hornet,  with  inlaid  wing.s,  and 
pieces  of  pectorals,  from  Harageh.  Of  uncertain  age  were  the  great  feathers  of 
silver  from  a  statue  of  Min,  found  at  Koptos.  At  Qurneh  bangles  of  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty  were  made  with  a  row  of  small  tubes  of  silver.  A  great  quantity  of  silver 
vases  are  recorded  in  the  papyrus  of  Rameses  III.  In  later  times  silver  is 
occasionally  found,  as  at  Zagazig  and  Defenneh,  and  a  large  silver  chain  at  Tanis. 
As  a  whole,  silver  is  quite  as  rare  as  gold  in  cemeteries  and  towns,  although  gold 
would  have  been  sought  for  and  removed  more  eagerly  by  robbers.  Though  the 
proportion  of  gold  to  silver  coming  from  any  one  source  would  be  determined  mainly 
by  the  produce  of  the  land,  the  totals  given  to  the  various  gods  by  Rameses  1 1 1 
during  his  reign  must  show  fairly  the  relative  amounts  of  the  precious  metals  in 
use.  It  is  not  quite  clear  how  far  totals  recapitulate ;  but  the  totals  offered  to  the 
various  gods  amount  to  9  cwt.  of  gold  and  30  cwt.  of  silver  ;  the  grand  totals  named 
later  are  20  cwt.  of  gold  and  33  cwt.  of  silver.  These  are  in  the  ratio  3  to  10  and 
3  to  5.  Roughly,  therefore,  the  weight  of  silver  was  two  or  three  times  that  of 
the  gold  ;  the  relative  values  were  probably  not  far  from  this.  The  value  of  gold 
to  silver  is  said  to  have  been  as  low  as  2  to  i  in  ancient  India,  and  6  to  i  in 
mediaeval  India.  In  other  lands  it  has  usually  been  between  10  and  17  to  i, 
at  present  it  is  33  to  i.  As  we  know  that  gold  was  obtained  in  Nubia,  and  in  the 
form  of  elcctrum  from  the  stream  washings  of  the  Aegean,  while  silver  could  only 
be  got  by  mining  in  North  Syria,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  values  may  have 
been  as  3  to  i  in  Egypt. 

Silver  was  probably  commoner  in  Babylonia,  as  is  shewn  by  the  great 
engraved  vase  of  Entemena,  14  inches  high.  This  is  a  couple  of  centuries  before 
Naramsin  (4000  B.C.  according  to  Nabonidus,  or  2850  B.C.  according  to  Berlin 
dating),  contemporary  with  the  Old  Kingdom  in  Egypt. 

Lead  is  found  almost  as  early  as  silver  in  prehistoric  Egypt,  being  used 
for  sacred  figures  (Fig.  15).  Probably  it  was  looked  on  as  an  inferior  kind  of 
silver.  The  sulphide  of  lead,  galena,  which  is  the  commonest  ore  of  lead,  is  found 
as  an  eye  paint  almost  as  commonly  as  malachite,  in  the  prehistoric  and 
1st  dynasty  times.  Both  galena  and  lead  are  rarely  found  in  the  Old  and  Middle 
Kingdoms,  but  lead  became  very  common  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  It  is  often 
mentioned  in  the  tribute  from  Syria,  and  doubtless  came  from  the  Taurus, 
associated  with  silver,  which  is  now  found  there.  It  became  so  common  that 
country  fishermen  used  it  regularly  for  weighting  the  edges  of  fishing  nets  (Fig.  16) 
as  is  done  at  present,  and  it  continued  to  be  thus  used  in  the  XXVIth  dynasty  and 
Roman  times.  It  is  also  found  used  for  filling  hollow  bronze  weights,  and  for 
adjusting  a  haematite  weight  by  plugging  a  hole  drilled  in  it.  In  the  palace  of 
Apries  at  Memphis,  we  find,  as  early  as  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  lead  was  used  for 
a  catchment  tank  to  receive  the  washings  of  the  palace  floors. 

Lead  was  very  common  in  Roman  times  all  over  the  Empire.  In  Egypt  it 
was  used  for  a  great  variety  of  tokens,  which  are  supposed  to  have  been  a  small 
currency  of  local  usage,  struck  to  supply  the  lack  of  regular  small  coinage. 


The  Metals  in  Egypt.  17 

Lead  was  used  frequently  in  later  times  for  alloying  with  copper ;  the 
cheapness  of  the  lead  and  fusibility  for  casting  were  the  advantages.  The  strength, 
however,  was  very  inferior  to  that  of  bronze,  and  it  was  only  employed  for 
statuettes,  nails,  etc.,  where  an  edge  was  not  used  for  cutting.  Strangely  it  occurs 
in  Western  bronze-age  tools ;  sometimes  in  small  proportion  along  with  tin ; 
but  also  as  mucins  30  per  cent,  in  Brittany  celts.  As  celts  are  also  known  made 
of  lead  only,  and  therefore  certainly  funerary  copies,  so  it  is  probable  that  these 
lead  alloys  are  only  ceremonial.  A  great  disadvantage  of  lead  alloy  with  copper 
is  that  it  separates  when  heated  to  the  melting  point  of  the  lead,  the  latter  draining 
away  and  leaving  an  alloy  of  30  per  cent,  lead  ;  obviously  this  property  is  what 
determines  the  Brittany  alloy  of  28i  to  32^  per  cent.  The  alloy  of  18  per  cent, 
lead  occurs  as  early  in  Babylonia  as  Bursin,  contemporary  with  the  Hyksos 
(Heuzey,  Catalogue,  314). 

Tin  and  bronze  should  be  considered  together,  as,  owing  to  tin  being  found  in 
few  regions,  its  source  is  the  important  question.  Of  the  pure  metal  there  are  no 
early  dated  examples  in  Europe,  some  from  the  late  bronze-age  lake  dwellings 
being  probably  the  earliest  known.  In  Egypt  the  first  examples  of  pure  tin  are  in 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty  ;  a  finger  ring  of  tin  was  found  at  Gurob,  and  a  thin  cast 
pilgrim  bottle  of  tin  at  Abydos  {Abydos  III,  xvii,  50).  As  bronze  is  sporadically 
found  at  a  much  earlier  date,  the  view  is  doubtless  correct  that  tin  was  not  reduced 
separately  from  the  ore,  but  the  mixed  ores  of  copper  and  tin  were  used  together. 
The  weight  of  the  great  ingot  of  tin  from  Falmouth  Harbour  throws  a  little  light 
on  its  date.  It  is  138  lb.,  which  is  lOO  of  the  mina  widely  known  in  Mediterranean 
trade,  formed  of  50  so-called  Phoenician  shekels.  This  must  not  lead  to  supposing 
it  cast  for  Phoenician  trade,  as  this  standard  was  usual  in  Syria,  Asia  Minor, 
Macedonia,  Spain,  and  known  as  the  Italic  mina  from  use  in  Southern  Italy.  The 
celebrated  octopus  weight  of  Knossos  is  40  of  these  same  minae.  This  connection 
seems  to  show  that  the  trade  was  earlier  than  the  Roman  occupation,  during  which 
the  usual  Roman  centum  pondiuvi  would  be  the  standard. 

Bronze. — The  earliest  hardening  material  for  copper  was  arsenic,  doubtless 
made  by  reducing  an  arsenical  copper  ore,  such  as  Fahlerz,  or  one  of  the  arseniates 
of  copper.  Such  was  found  in  the  copper  from  the  1st  dynasty  tombs,  without  tin, 
lead,  or  zinc  (Berthelot) ;  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  hatchet  with  yg  per  cent,  of 
arsenic  (Jllahun);  and  in  the  Cypriote  copper  with  vi,  per  cent,  to  47  per  cent. 
(Dussaud).  Another  means  of  hardening  was  by  bismuth,  amounting  in  some 
1st  dynasty  examples  to  i  per  cent. ;  this  was  also  doubtless  produced  by  some 
copper  ore  containing  bismuth  naturally,  and  discovered  to  yield  a  superior  metal 
for  cutting  purposes. 

The  earliest  piece  of  true  bronze  known  is  the  rod  found  in  the  foundations  of 
a  mastaba  of  the  Ilird  dynasty  at  Meydum,  which  contained  91  per  cent,  tin  and 
'5  per  cent,  arsenic  (second  analysis  of  unaltered  core  by  Dr.  Gladstone). 

The  ages  of  the  Old  and  Middle  Kingdom  shew  a  curious  contradiction  of 
evidence.  On  the  one  hand  tools  analysed  from  Kahun  shew  almost  pure  copper, 
with  never  over  2  per  cent,  of  tin. 

Copper.  Tin.     Arsenic.    Antimony.       Iron.         Total. 


Hatchet     . 

..     93-26 

•52 

3-90 

•16 

•21 

98-05 

Chisel 

■•     96-35 

2-i6 

•36 

0 

0 

98-87 

Mirror 

..     95-0 

Some 

Some 

0 

Little 

Knife 

0 

•5 

0 

0 

0 

Copper. 

Tin. 

86-2 

57 

767 

8-2 

6g-2 

9-8 

68-4 

i6-3 

85-0 

10 

18  27w  Metals  in  Egypt. 

But  analyses  by  Berthelot 

Of  a  Vlth  dynasty  fragment  give 
Of  Xllth  dynasty,  ring  from  mastaba,  Dahshur 
hook... 

bracelet        

nail  of  Fuabra 

Thus  if  the  ages  of  these  samples  are  well  authenticated  they  would  shew 
bronze  to  be  usual  from  the  Vlth  dynasty;  but  the  only  clearly  dated  piece,  the 
last  one,  has  scarcely  any  tin. 

The  difficulty  is  not  removed  by  looking  elsewhere.  The  daggers  of  the 
.second  Troy,  contemporary  with  the  Xllth  dynasty,  are  of  bronze  with  8  to 
1 1  per  cent.  tin.  As  a  whole,  Dussaud  tabulates  Troy,  Crete,  Cyclades,  and 
Cyprus  as  using  bronze  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  while  Thessaly  and  Babylonia  only 
had  copper,  or  copper-lead  alloy. 

The  present  conclusion — until  more  analyses  may  enlighten  us — seems  to  be 
that  bronze  was  first  brought  down  the  Aegean  in  common  use  ;  and  often,  but  not 
regularly,  penetrated  to  Egypt  during  the  Xllth  dynasty.  It  did  not  come  overland 
either  from  Italy  or  from  the  east.  This  points  to  a  northern  source  for  the  tin. 
When  we  see  how  very  important  bronze  work  was  later  on  in  Hungary,  how  copper 
abounds  there,  and  tin  in  the  surrounding  Bohemia,  Saxony,  Zinnwald,  and  Galicia, 
and  that  the  bronze  age  in  Hungary  is  placed  as  early  as  "  the  beginning  of  the 
second  millennium,"  or  1900  B.C.,  when  it  was  certainly  not  common  in  Egypt,  it 
seems  not  improbable  that  the  Hungarian  regions  were  the  earliest  source  of 
European  and  Egyptian  bronze.  There  was  a  well  developed  work  in  polished 
stone  earlier  in  that  region,  which  would  provide  a  basis  of  culture  for  the  early 
adoption  of  metal.  Of  the  other  possible  sources  of  tin,  Cornwall,  Brittany, 
Portugal,  and  Spain  are  too  distant,  Italy  is  barred  by  the  lack  of  bronze  in  early 
Thessaly  on  the  road  to  the  Aegean,  and  Persia  would  have  supplied  Babylonia 
and  Egypt  long  before  Europe,  whereas  they  had  bronze  later  than  the  Aegean. 
The  Austro-Hungarian  .sources  seem  therefore  to  be  the  most  likely  for  the  earliest 
continuous  use  of  bronze.  No  doubt  it  was  produced  occasionally  by  chance  finds 
of  ore,  in  the  pyramid  period  and  onward,  but  it  was  not  regularly  used  in  Egypt 
till  the  XVII  Ith  dynasty.  Examples  of  wrought  bronze  are  shown  here  in  the  very 
thin  vases.  Figs.  17  and  18,  and  the  patterned  bowl.  Fig.  19.  Fig.  20  is  of  rough 
hammered  copper,  probably  of  very  early  date. 

On  reaching  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  there  is  no  question  that  bronze  was  the 
standard  material  in  Egypt.     The  analyses  are : 


Copper. 

Tin. 

Arsenic. 

Antimony. 

Iron. 

Total. 

Hatchet 89-59 

6-67 

■95 

Trace 

•54 

9775 

90'09 

7-29 

•22 

>» 

— 

97-60 

Ring,  XlXth       ...       775 

9-6 

•••      757 

1 6-2 

Vase,  XXth         ...       76-8 

151 

Arrow  head,  XXth       81-9 

12-2 

Statue  base,  XXI Ind  77-9 

5-0 

Yet  copper  was  used  for  some  purposes,  as  in  a  foundation  deposit  of  Sa-amen, 
XXIst  dynasty.  These  alloys  with  5  to  16  per  cent,  of  tin  vary  as  those  of  western 
bronzes,  which  contain  7  to  14  per  cent,  of  tin. 

Iron  has  had  more  contradictory  statements  made  about  it  than  any  other 
metal.     The  recent  discovery  of  the  earliest  iron,  by  Mr.  Wainwright,  gave  occasion 


Tlie  Metals  in  Egypt.  19 

to  sum   up  all  the  known  examples,  and  here  we  may  repeat  them  with  some 
comment. 

The  earliest  examples  are  the   Gerzeh  beads,  of  S.D.  60-63   {Lnhyrintli  and 
Gerzeh,  p.  15).     These  were  made  of  hammered  iron,  and  so  scarce  was  it  that  the 


Hammered  Bronze  and  Copper  Work. 

17.  Vase  with  Lotus  Handle.     Bronze,  ^Ij-inch  thick. 

18.  Vase  "Washer  of  Sandals  of  Amen,  Tehuti-hetep."     Bronze,  ^'j-inch  thick. 

19.  Bowl  with  Hammer  Pattern.     Bronze,  ^V-inch  thick. 

20.  Copper  Bowl  Roughly  Hammered.     Vo-'NCH  thick. 

17-19.  XVHIth  Dynastv.    20.  Early  Dynasty. 

B   2 


20  The  Metals  in  Egypt. 

beads  were  threaded  alternately  with  gold  beads.  Next  is  the  well  known  piece  of 
sheet  iron,  declared  by  Perring  to  have  been  found  between  blocks  of  stone  of  the 
pyramid  of  Khufii  at  Gizeh.  Then  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  cursorily  mentions  in  his 
catalogue  of  the  Hulaq  Museum,  1884,  that  in  1882  he  collected  many  fragments  of 
picks  of  iron  in  the  black  pyramid  of  Abusir,  of  the  Vth  dynasty.  In  both  of  these 
cases  there  is  lacking  a  certainty  that  the  iron  was  not  left  by  some  later  destroyers 
of  the  buildings.  An  absolutely  dated  case  is  that  of  the  mass  of  rust,  apparently 
from  a  wedge  of  iron,  found  stuck  together  with  copper  adzes  of  Vlth  dynasty  type, 
at  the  level  of  floors  of  that  age  in  the  early  temple  of  Abydos. 

Coming  to  the  Xlllth  dynasty,  there  is  the  iron  spear  head  (Fig.  21)  found  in 
Nubia  by  Maclver,  in  the  inner  chamber  of  a  multiple  tomb,  which  contained 
altogether  fifteen  skeletons  in  position,  with  gold  ornaments  and  a  copper  dagger, 
and  therefore  was  apparently  quite  unplundered.  From  the  pottery  and  beads, 
this  tomb  (K.  32) — like  others  near  it — was  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  ;  it  is  said  to 
be  of  the  same  age  as  K.  8,  which  contained  the  name  of  Neferhetep,  the  twenty-first 
king  of  the  Xlllth  dynasty.  Contemporary  with  this  is  probably  the  iron  stated 
to  be  found  in  the  second  city  of  Troy. 

Attributed  to  the  XVI Ith  dynasty,  on  unknown  grounds,  is  the  pyramid  of 
Muhammeriah,  near  Esneh,  where  Maspero  records  finding  a  point  of  an  iron  chisel 
and  a  ferrule  of  a  handle,  in  the  mortar  which  united  two  blocks  of  stone  {Bulaq 
Catalogue,  as  before).  Attributed  to  the  XVI I  Ith  dynasty  is  an  iron  stud  from 
a  box,  and  an  iron  finger  ring,  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum.  Most  unquestionable 
of  all  is  an  iron  sickle  which  was  found  by  Belzoni  beneath  a  sphinx  of  Horemheb, 
in  the  avenue  leading  from  the  temple  of  Mut  to  Karnak.  This  is  therefore  fixed 
to  about  1330  B.C.  At  Troy  an  iron  knife  is  said  to  be  about  1500  B.C.  This  is  also 
the  very  vague  date  given  for  tombs  by  the  Indus  containing  iron.  The  sculptures 
of  this  age,  representing  double  bellows  and  beating  metal  (ROSELLINI,  Mon.  Civ., 
plates  L,  LXIII),  have  no  connection  with  iron  working.  The  beating  is  evidently 
being  done  in  the  cold,  as  a  man  holds  the  metal  with  his  hands ;  and  a  finished 
vase,  of  the  usual  form  in  copper,  is  shown  beyond  him.  The  bellows  are  only  an 
improvement  on  the  older  reed  blowpipes,  used  always  before  this  time  for  smelting 
work. 

We  can  now  review  what  may  be  called  the  sporadic  Iron  Age.  The  supposi- 
tion often  put  forward  tiiat  iron  might  entirely  disappear  in  course  of  time,  is 
a  mere  fallacy.  When  buried  in  earth  iron  rusts  much  slower  than  if  exposed  to 
air,  and  in  many  situations  it  is  remarkably  preserved.  When  it  has  at  last  been 
turned  to  rust,  it  has  become  a  material  which  can  never  disappear.  A  lump  of 
oxide  of  iron  is  practically  insoluble  when  buried,  and  its  strong  colour  and  staining 
power  make  it  very  obvious.  To  remove  all  trace  of  it  when  buried  would  be 
impossible  within  the  human  period  by  any  conditions. 

The  relative  number  of  examples  of  iron  to  those  of  copper  and  bronze  must 
therefore  give  us  a  fair  idea  of  the  proportion  in  which  they  were  used.  The  iron 
was  always  sporadic,  in  no  period  or  place  has  anything  like  a  large  proportion  of 
iron  been  found  in  the  period  before  us.  It  seems  impossible  therefore  to  suppose 
that  it  was  intelligently  produced  by  an  understood  process  as  a  regular  manufacture. 
If  men  could  produce  at  will  a  pound,  they  would  produce  before  long  a  ton,  and 
iron  would  be  freely  used  where  it  was  applicable.  Yet  this  was  not  the  case  at  any 
time  before  1200  B.C.  It  seems  therefore  that  the  sources  of  the  sporadic  iron  must 
have  been  either  native  iron  or  else  casual  production  by  accident.  The  great 
quantities  of  pure  haematite  in  Sinai,  and  the  enormous  eruption  of  ferruginous  basalt 


The  Metals  in  Egypt. 


21 


there,  which  probably  burnt  up  forests  in  its  outflow,  are  ample  material  for 
producing  either  accidental  or  native  iron.  Two  other  points  are  clear  :  that  the 
iron  was  not  meteoric  is  proved  by  its  malleability  in  the  first  instance ;  that  there 
is  no  reason  to  question  the  less  indubitable  cases  is  shown  by  the  completely 
proved  and  recorjjed  cases  of  the  prehistoric  beads,  the  Vlth  dynasty  lump,  and  the 


9  :  20 


Iron  Tools. 


21.  Spear  Head,  Xllrii  Dynasty.     (Macivek,  Buhen,  \'\.  88.) 

22.  K^•IFE  WITH  Cast  Bronze  Handle,  X.XIIIrd  Dynasty? 

23.  Knife,  XXIIIrd  Dynasty?     Uamesbeum,  with  22. 

24.  Double  Axe. 

25.  Sickle  with  Inserted  Steel  Teeth.  • 

26.  Sickle  with  Groove  for  Teeth. 


B   3 


22  The  Metals  in  Egypt. 

Xlllth  dynasty  spear  head.  No  shadow  of  doubt  seems  possible  about  these,  and 
so  all  the  other  instances  may  be  accepted. 

Now  we  may  turn  to  the  developed  Iron  Age,  when  the  use  of  the  metal  was 
continuous  and  extensive.  It  began  to  be  used  in  Egypt  at  about  1200  is.c.  There 
is  the  halbert  from  the  sand  bed  of  the  foundations  of  Ramessu  III  at  Abydos 
{^Ahydos  II,  33J ;  the  iron  knives  found  in  the  brick  arches  of  the  Ramesseum, 
where  the  objects  of  living  use  ceased  about  iioo  u.c.  One  knife  is  very  slight  in 
the  blade,  but  has  a  bronze  handle  cast  upon  it  (Fig.  22),  showing  that  bronze  was 
the  more  usual  material.     Another  knife  (Fig.  23)  is  entirely  of  iron. 

The  very  important  instance  that  has  lately  come  to  light  is  the  iron  sword 
with  cartouches  of  Sety  II,  1214-1210  B.C.,  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum  {Zcitschrift 
Aegyptische  Sprache,  L,  61,  plate  V;  and  British  School  Athens,  XVIII,  282). 
This  sword,  though  much  rusted,  appears  to  be  of  the  .same  type  as  a  more 
perfect  iron  one  from  Egypt,  which  is  of  the  European  type,  of  Hungary  or  the 
Balkans.  It  occurs  also  in  Cretan  tombs  of  the  age  just  after  the  Mykenaean  and 
before  the  geometric  style,  e.Kactly  agreeing  with  our  previous  dating  of  the 
Mykenaean  age.  Now  one  important  point  is  that  this  type  of  sword  is  more 
commonly  found  of  bronze  than  of  iron,  in  Crete  and  Europe;  hence  1200  B.C. 
must  be  about  the  beginning  of  the  free  use  of  iron  ;  had  it  been  common  before 
that  in  Europe  such  swords  would  have  all  been  of  iron.  Also  at  1200  B.C.  comes 
the  great  overthrow  of  the  Libyan  invasion,  when  9000  bronze  swords  were  taken, 
showing  that  iron  was  not  yet  usual.  This  agrees  with  the  previous,  and  quite 
independent,  assignment  of  1200  B.C.  as  the  date  of  iron  beginning  to  be  used  in 
Crete.  There  is  thus  a  fairly  close  fixing  of  the  turning  point,  from  archaeological 
evidence. 

The  next  great  stage  is  the  free  use  of  iron  in  Assyria.  In  881  B.C.  iron  came 
as  tribute  from  the  Chalybes  region,  south-east  of  the  Black  Sea.  About  the  same 
date  it  was  obtained  near  Carchemish.  At  800  B.C.  5000  talents  of  iron  were 
captured  at  Damascus.  About  700  B.C.  there  was  the  immense  store-house  of  iron 
in  crude  ingot,  estimated  to  contain  160  tons  of  metal,  as  well  as  finished  articles. 

In  Egypt,  a  group  of  iron  tools  found  at  Thebes  is  dated,  by  an  Assyrian 
helmet,  to  the  invasions  of  668  or  666  B.C.  (^Six  Temples).  These  are  the  parents 
of  many  modern  forms ;  and  most  of  them  are  of  steel,  sufficiently  to  take 
permanent  magnetism.  Rather  later  iron  tools  are  common  in  the  Greek  settle- 
ment of  Naukratis,  but  they  do  not  appear  in  purely  Egyptian  sites. 

Many  suggestions  of  an  Ethiopian  source  of  Egyptian  iron  have  been  put 
forward.  Had  iron  been  usual  there  at  an  early  date  it  would  probably  have 
become  familiar  in  Egypt.  So  far  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  any  of  the 
slag  heaps  at  Meroe  and  elsewhere  in  Ethiopia  are  earlier  than  the  considerable 
civilisation  of  that  region,  which  began  with  the  XXVth  dynasty  and  continued 
from  700  B.C.  onwards. 

The  sources  of  the  European  and  Euphratean  iron  would  be  quite  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  iron  found  in  Egypt,  even  apart  from  the  Ethiopian.  Yet  iron  slag 
is  often  found  in  crucibles  at  Memphis,  Defenneh  and  Naukratis,  showing  that  in 
Greek  times  the  ore  was  reduced  in  Egypt,  from  whatever  sources  it  came.  For 
Western  Europe  doubtless  Noricum  was  the  main  source,  as  that  region — the 
modern  Styria — is  one  of  the  greatest  and  earliest  centres  of  iron  working.  For 
Assyria  the  Chalybes  region,  south-east  of  the  Black  Sea,  and  the  Tiyari  mountains, 
north-east  of  Nineveh,  would  be  the  sources.  It  is  almost  certainly  through  the 
Chalybes  that  the  Greeks  first  knew  this  iron,  as  they  called  it  khalups,  a  word  that 


J 


r 


r 

b 


The  Metals  in  Egypt.  23 

seems  foreign  in  its  form.  There  were  two  tribes  of  Chalybes,  which  are  most  fully 
mentioned  in  the  Anabasis,  and  by  Strabo.  One  was  in  the  north-west  of  Armenia, 
the  most  warlike  people  of  the  region,  wearing  helmets  and  greaves,  and  armed 
with  a  long  spear  and  a  falchion.  Across  the  mountains  there  were  the  other 
Chalybes  along  the  Black  Sea,  behind  Cerasus,  who  lived  by  working  iron,  and  a 
little  west  of  tha^  iron  working  has  continued  to  the  present  time. 

The  name  of  the  Chalybes,  from  which  the  Greeks  took  their  name  for  the 
metal,  is  apparently  Semitic  in  origin.  It  seems  obviously  connected  with  the 
Arabic  halaby,  a  tinker ;  and  with  the  well  known  mutation  of  h  and  s  we  can 
hardly  refuse  to  see  in  this  the  soltiby  or  steel-worker  of  Arabia.  This  word  solb  for 
steel  is  Semitic,  as  it  is  clearly  derived  from  iron  being  the  strongest  material ;  solb 
is  loins,  the  strongest  part ;  salib  is  firm  or  hard  ;  salebah,  solidity  ;  solb,  steel  ; 
soliiby,  a  steel-worker;  halaby,  a  tinker;  Chalybes,  the  iron  workers;  Chalups,  iron; 
and  our  own  word  chalybeate  ends  the  chain. 

Whether  the  distinction  between  sideros  and  khaltips  was  that  of  iron  and  steel, 
deserves  to  be  considered,  certainly  the  Assyrian  tools  found  in  Egypt  are  mostly 
mild  steel,  as  they  can  be  permanently  magnetised.  The  distinction  in  use  of  iron 
and  steel  is  most  marked  in  the  sickles  of  Roman  age,  where  the  body  of  the  sickle 
has  a  groove  all  along  it  (Figs.  25,  26),  in  which  is  fitted  the  thin  strip  of  the  more 
valuable  steel  cut  into  a  saw-edge  {Ehnasya,  23).  One  of  the  finest  iron  tools  is 
the  large  double  axe.  Fig.  24  ;  unfortunately  the  date  of  it  is  not  known. 

Antimony  was  worked  in  Mesopotamia,  where  it  was  used  pure,  and  also  as  an 
alloy  in  copper.  In  Egypt  beads  of  antimony  are  found,  of  the  XXIInd  dynasty, 
and  therefore  they  may  have  been  brought  in  from  the  East.  It  is  generally 
reputed  that  the  kohl  eyepaint  is  sulphide  of  antimony,  but  that  is  the  rarest 
material.  In  prehistoric  times  galena  and  malachite  were  regularly  used  for  the 
eyes.  In  historic  times,  out  of  34  analyses  21  are  of  galena,  5  ochre,  3  malachite, 
3  manganese,  and  only  i  each  of  magnetite  and  antimony.  It  does  not  seem, 
therefore,  that  the  Egyptians  had  any  ready  source  of  antimony. 

Zinc  has  only  been  reported  once,  as  ij  per  cent,  in  a  piece  of  prehistoric 
copper.  Probably  if  looked  for  it  would  be  found  in  metal  of  the  Roman  period,  as 
the  Roman  coinage  is  mainly  of  brass.  Coins  of  the  first  two  centuries  of  the 
empire  average  12  per  cent,  of  zinc,  and  only  2  per  cent,  of  tin,  and  ih  per  cent, 
lead  (Smyth,  Catalogue  of  .  .  .  Large- Brass'). 

Osm-iridium  is  found  occasionally  as  an  impurity  in  gold  of  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
in  the  form  of  small  hard  white  specks.  The  object  of  the  Egyptian  would 
certainly  be  that  of  the  modern  worker — to  get  rid  of  it  if  possible. 

Some  of  the  above  material  is  due  to  Prof.  Gowland's  lecture  on  "  The  Metals 
in  Antiquity"  {Journ.  R.  Anthrop.  Inst.,  1912,  235),  which  is  valuable  for  the 
accounts  of  known  sources  and  processes,  though  not  so  complete  on  the  historical 
side.  Dussaud's  Civilisations  Prchelleniques,  De  Morgan's  L'Age  de  la  Pierre  et  les 
Mi'taux,  and  the  records  of  my  own  excavations  have  supplied  the  main  facts.  It 
still  remains  most  desirable  to  have  a  much  larger  number  of  analyses  of  exactly 
dated  examples.  A  spectroscopic  examination  of  ores  from  different  sources,  for 
detecting  rare  elements,  might  give  the  clues  to  the  origin  of  the  various  ancient 
supplies  of  metals. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


B4 


(      24      ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Recueil  de  Travaux  relatifs  a  la  Pliilologie  et  a  rArchdologie 
egyptienues  et  assyriennes,  Vol.  XXXV'I,   191 4.     Li  v.  1-2. 


und  f\ ^.     Hermann    Kees.     In   the   frequent  figures   of  the   ka 


following  a  king,  with  the  falcon-name  or  ^rt-name  on  the  head,  there  is  usually  the 
inscription  over  it  describing  it  as  "  the  king's  i'a,  life  of  the  lord  of  both  lands, 
Mcfit  zebt  khent  per  duat."  It  has  long  been  a  question  what  localities  are 
described  by  these  names  sebt  and  per  duat.  One  inscription  at  Dendereh  adds 
per  dua  em  het  seshesht,  "  in  the  temple  of  the  sistrum,"  i.e.,  of  Dendereh.  This 
implies  that  the  localities  belong  to  a  temple.  Further,  at  Dendereh  and  at  Edfu 
a  chamber  is  called  the  per  duat.  It  is  too  small  for  active  ceremonies,  and  was 
probably  a  wardrobe.  The  scenes  on  it  show  the  king  purified  with  water  and 
incense ;  the  king's  ka  purified  with  incense ;  and  the  king's  bones  with  natron. 
It  appears  also  to  be  the  name  of  part  of  the  palace,  as  there  is  a  title  in  the  Old 
Kingdom  Her  seslita  ne  per  duat,  "  over  the  secrets  of  the  per  duat."  When 
Sanehat  returned  to  court  the  king  ordered  his  officials  "  Go  ye  to  the  okltcnuti 
duett  that  he  may  renew  his  position,"  suggesting  that  it  was  the  wardrobe  of  the 
court.  Regarding  the  zebt,  there  is  a  title  shemsu  ne  zebt,  also  seliez  zebt  and  mer 
zebt.  The  first  occurs  on  the  temple  of  Ne-user-ra.  From  these  evidences,  and 
much  collateral  material  of  less  direct  weight,  it  is  concluded  that  the  per  duat  and 
zebt  were  parts  of  the  primitive  palace ;  like  all  other  parts  of  the  palace  they 
became  transformed  into  the  temple  system. 

Sallier  II,  p.  i,  1.  8. — G.  Maspero.  A  short  note  points  out  a  mention  of 
a  place  for  combats  of  bulls,  a  regular  arena.  This  agrees  with  the  mention  by 
Strabo  of  regular  bull  fights  in  the  dromos  of  the  temple  of  Ptah  at  Memphis. 

Notes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe. —  Alan  H.  GARDINER.  This  is  a  supplement  to 
Dr.  Gardiner's  edition  of  the  story,  giving  parallel  text  of  those  parts  which  are 
duplicated  in  various  sources.  There  are  now  thirteen  sources  known,  most  of 
which  are  of  only  a  short  passage  on  ostraca,  probably  writing  exercises. 

Das  Felsheiligtum  des  Min  bei  Achniini. — Hermann  Kees.  This  is  an 
account  of  the  rock  shrine  in  the  cliffs  north  of  Ekhmin,  with  hand  copies  of  the 
inscriptions  compared  with  those  of  Lepsius.  It  dates  from  Thothmes  III,  with 
additions  by  Ay  and  Ptolemy  I  and  II. 

Refherches  sur  la  famille  dont  fit  partie  Montouemhat. — GEORGES  Legrain. 
lime  partie,  Les  etifants  de  Khaemhor.  Chap.  III'^™^,  Branche  Nsiptah.  This  is 
a  continuation  of  the  list  of  monuments  reported  in  ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1914,  p.  37. 
The  list  continues : 

XLVI.     Chapel  of  Tahraqa  in  the  temple  of  Mut. 

XLVII.     Statue  of  Grant  collection. 


Recueil  de  Travaux. 

XLVIII-LIX.     Funeral  cones  of  Mentuemhat. 

LX.     Base  of  statue  of  Mentuemhat. 

LXI.     Stele  of  adoption  of  Nitoeris. 

LXII,  LXIII.     Group  of  Mentuemhat  and  Nsiptah  II. 

LXIV.     Table  of  offerings  of  Nsiptah  II. 

LXV.    ^tatue  of  Nsiptah  II. 

LXVI.     Statue  of  Psenmut  dedicated  by  Mentuemhat  II. 

N.N.     Bronze  fitting  of  gate  of  Da-ast-hebu,  dau.  Mentuemhat. 


Black  Granmte  Head  of  Mentuemhat.     Temple  of  Mut.     Cairo. 


The  relationships  of  all  the  persons  named  here  are  as  follow  :- 
Astkhebt 


>  Da  ast  hebu  1 1  ? 


Neskhonsu 


\ 


/ 


>  Nesptah. 


Astkhebt 


Nesptah  I  .    — Mentuemhat   I     \    „  ,,  ,       ,, 

\  \  Pa  sen  mut — Mentuemhat  II. 

/  Uzarans  / 

eu  ..      /  Zed  khonsu  afonkh  ? 

Shepncmut    / 

— Nesthoth. 

— Horsaast. 

Da  ast  hebu  I. 


26  Rcmeil  de  Travaux. 

Mentuemhat  the  great  ruler  had  four  wives  ;  the  children  of  two  are  known, 
but  the  mothers  of  the  other  two  are  uncertain.  The  total  limits  of  the  above  four 
generations  is  about  750  to  600  B.C.  Mentuemhat  had  concentrated  most  of  the 
great  titles  ;  hereditary  noble,  prince  of  Thebes,  keeper  of  the  royal  city  and  of 
Nekhen,  sealbcarer  of  Upper  Egypt,  fourth  prophet  of  Amen,  scribe  of  the  temple 
of  Amen,  instructor  of  the  priests  in  the  temples,  keeper  of  the  royal  land  to  its 
limits.     In  official  acts  he  and  his  son  took  precedence  of  the  high  priest  of  Thebes. 

Bemerkimgen  zuin  Atonhymnus. — Fr.  W.  von  BissiNc;.  This  is  a  criticism 
of  small  differences  in  the  various  examples  of  the  Aten  hymn  at  Tell  Amarna. 
The  conclusion  is  that  most  of  the  errors  and  variants  arose  from  the  sculptor 
rendering  in  columns  of  hieroglyphs  the  documents  written  in  lines  of  hieratic. 

Note  additionelle  sur  "  Le  X'  name  de  la  Haiite-i.gypte."—V>.  TOURAIEFF.  A 
description  of  a  stele  at  Moscow  giving  figures  of  six  divinities  of  Aphroditopolis, 
the  Osiride  family  and  Atmu.  The  latter  god  seems  to  have  been  represented  as 
two  hawks  on  a  standard,  like  the  ensign  of  Koptos.  The  stele  was  for  a  priestess 
of  Atmu  Ta-khredt-ast  born  of  Ta-khredt-khonsu. 

Une  stele  de  Hawara. — G.  Daressy.  This  stele  of  the  Ptolemaic  age  bears 
long  inscriptions,  which  are  here  given  in  full.     The  person  was  a  prophet  of  Neit, 

Pedasebek  son  of  Peda and  Nefru-sebek.     The  father's  name  contains  that 

of  god  walking  holding  the  user.  The  longest  text  is  a  copy  of  the  Book  of 
traversing  eternity,  of  which  but  few  copies  are  known.  The  usual  text  is  printed 
here  in  duplicate  with  the  stele.  Another  long  text  is  an  appeal  to  be  remembered, 
not  of  the  old  vigorous  kind  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,  but  very  diff'use  and  vague. 
He  boasts  that  he  did  not  sit  out  and  gossip  on  the  mastaba.  He  was  a  councillor 
to  his  district,  no  girl  wept  because  of  him  in  the  time  of  prosperity,  but  each 
mourned  when  he  was  enfeebled.  He  made  every  one  that  he  instructed  to  know 
his  duty,  purified  and  guided  him.  There  is  a  ftesut  da  futep  to  Amenemhat  HI, 
in  which  Pedasebek  is  written  Pen-sebek. 

Monuments  I'gj'ptiens  divers. — RAYMOND  Weill,  i.  An  archaic  cylinder 
of  grey  glazed  pottery.  The  inscription  is  rudely  incised,  "  Horus  vtery  taui(?), 
vulture  and  uraeus  fiebty,  Horus,  Aty  the  king  standing."  It  appears  as  if  after 
inety  there  were  ta  with  two  strokes  of  earth  sign.  If  so  this  would  be  of  Pepy  I, 
which  would  be  likely  enough  otherwise.  A  cylinder  of  the  MacGregor  collection 
is  compared  with  this,  but  there  are  no  signs  in  common,  e.xcept  Horus  and  tner, 
and  it  is  certainly  of  a  different  king.  Another  cylinder  of  white  pottery  has  a  stag 
twice  repeated  on  it. 

2.  Clay  impressions  of  the  basalt  cylinder  of  Khufu,  which  has  been  for  some 
years  in  University  College,  London.  These  clay  impressions  were  made  by  the 
Arabs,  and  were  commonly  to  be  seen  on  sale.  Capt.  Weill  supposes  that  two 
different  cylinders  were  used  to  make  the  impressions,  and  that  the  impressions 
came  ft'om  some  ancient  group. 

3.  A  cylinder  of  dark  blue  glaze  of  Assa,  curiously  cut  off  .short  at  the  top, 
leaving  only  the  feet  of  the  falcon.  It  was  for  a  "  nestit  rekh  chief  of  the  prophets 
in  all  places,  prophet  of  Neit  north  of  the  fortress."  This  title  was  parallel  to  that 
of  Ptah  south  of  the  fortress,  both  referring  to  the  positions  of  the  temples  to  the 
Memphis  fortress. 


Reaieil  de  Travaux.  27 

4.  Another  example  of  a  dog  with  the  Berber  name  Be/iii,  Hke  the  dog  Belmka 
of  the  Antef  tomb,  has  been  met  on  the  remains  of  a  tomb  cut  up  for  sale.  It 
appears  to  be  of  the  Vth  dynasty. 

5.  A  piece  of  a  limestone  tablet,  with  squares  ruled  on  it,  and  the  cartouche 
Ra-maot  engraved.  This  is  connected  with  two  scarabs  which  have  the  name 
Ra-maot  Sebek-hetep.  This  name  is  not  yet  known  on  any  larger  monuments, 
and  the  position  of  it  is  obscure.     It  is  probably  of  the  XlVth  dynasty. 

6.  A  wooden  stamp  has  a  cartouche  on  it,  surmounted  by  feathers.  It  reads 
Amen  7icb  and  a  uraeus. 

7.  An  order  scribbled  in  hieratic  on  a  potsherd,  refers  to  a  case  to  be  made  by 
a  carpenter,  of  which  a  sketch  is  put  below  the  writing.  The  sketch  has  by  it,  at 
the  side  "  Height  5  palms,"  along  the  top  "  Width  4  palms,"  and  the  proportion  of 
the  sketch  agrees  to  this.  Further  out  on  one  side  is  "4  in  the  menu  ";  hence  menu 
is  the  name  for  the  horizontal  distance  away  from  the  eye,  what  we  call  "  deep  back." 
The  proportions  are  familiar  enough  in  the  boxes  for  funeral  objects,  about  a  foot 
square  and  fifteen  inches  high,  with  a  small  cornice.  Capt.  Weill,  however,  supposes 
it  to  have  been  the  stone  basis  for  a  statuette. 

8.  An  account  is  given  of  a  fine  tomb  at  Tuneh,  which  contained  a  sarcophagus 
now  in  the  Cairo  Museum,  and  many  ushabtis  now  scattered.  This  was  of  Tehuti- 
ardas,  son  of  Shepses-ardas,  both  high  priests  of  Hermopolis. 

9.  A  broken  lid  of  a  stone  box,  with  a  bound  captive  l>ing  on  it,  bears  the 
name  of  Sheshenq  III. 

10.  A  small  ivory  pendant,  in  the  form  of  a  couchant  bird,  has  on  the  base  a 
figure  of  a  king  squatting,  and  a  blundered  cartouche  of  late  time. 

1 1.  A  throne  of  a  seated  figure,  coming  from  Saft  el  Henneh,  bears  inscriptions 
of  Kharu  (the  Syrian),  born  of  Pa-un-nekhti  and  the  lady  Tadaher. 

12.  Some  of  the  inscribed  blocks  are  described  that  have  come  to  light  in  the 
recent  cleaning  of  the  Deir  Amba  Shenudeh,  or  Deir  el  Abyad  or  White  Monastery. 
They  are  of  Aahmes,  and  a  shrine  of  Hakar  of  black  granite.  Strangely  no  notice 
is  taken  of  the  great  red  granite  shrine  of  Naifaarud,  which  has  anciently  been  cut 
up  and  used  to  floor  the  nave  of  the  basilica.  A  reference  to  the  Research  Account 
volume  Athribis,  p.  14,  would  have  supplied  this,  and  also  explained  that  the  ruins 
near  the  monastery  are  those  of  an  earlier  Christian  church  and  town,  and  not  of  a 
pagan  temple,  as  is  suggested  in  this  paper. 

13.  Some  pottery  stands  are  formed  of  three  closed  vases,  joined  by  cross 
pieces  ;  they  are  of  Coptic  date. 

Einige  Bemerkungen  ilber  den  Throiiwechsel  ini  Alten  Reich. — Amklie  Hertz. 
This  paper  calls  attention  to  the  uniform  formula  of  the  beginning  of  each  reign  on 
the  Palermo  stone,  which  was  already  noticed  some  years  ago.  First  is  nesut  bati 
khoit,  the  manifestation  of  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt ;  then  the  union  of 
the  lands,  shewn  by  entwined  plants  around  the  sina  ;  then  deben  IiA  anb,  "  procession 
round  the  wall  "  as  it  has  been  rendered.  Perhaps  "  procession  behind  the  fortress  " 
would  be  a  closer  idea.  It  is  again  proposed  that  this  is  a  ceremonial  at  the 
beginning  of  a  reign,  a  perambulation  of  the  boundaries  to  take  possession.  There 
follows  a  discussion  of  the  months  and  days  named  for  the  fractions  of  years 
beginning  and  ending  reigns.  Unfortunately  they  have  been  wrongly  extracted, 
10  for  9  months,  and  ignoring  the  months  lost  in  fractures  of  the  stone.     The 


28  Recueil  de  Travaux, 

intervals  really  appear  as  follows,  those  with  a  ?  being  inferred  from  the  space  now 

damaged : — 

Mena(?)  6  m.       7  d."l  ^„,    .  ^  ,, 

^  '  '        >•  lO  m.  20d.,  mterregnum  45  d. 

+  4  m.     13  d.  J 

Shepseskaf      3  m.  ?  24  d.T  . ,  ,  1    •  ^  ,„j 

^  -^  ^       Vi\  va.    5d.,  mterregnum  30d. 

+  7  m.  ?  II  d.J  ^  ^  ^ 

Neferarkara     om.       6d.  "1,  j,.  i 

■^  w  I  m.  I  ^d.,  interregnum  22  d. 

+  2m.       7  d.J  ^  ^ 

Note  sur  I' Isthmus  de  Sues. — Jean  ClilDAT.  This  paper  describes  various 
objects  from  Tell  el-Maskhuta. 

1.  The  upper  and  lower  end  pieces  of  a  door,  cast  in  bronze,  with  a  dedication 
"  Bastet  give  life  to  Peda-atum  son  of  Peda-khonsu,  born  of  the  lady  of  the  house 
Tada-hernepe,  year  6." 

2.  Bronze  base  of  a  statuette  with  inlaid  silver  inscription  of  Nepat  the 
goddess  of  grain,  dedicated  by  the  scribe  of  rolls  of  the  palace  Zed-neit-auf-onkh. 

3.  Head  of  rose  granite  of  Saite  period,  of  a  servant  of  Bastet,  uartu  of  the 
,  named  Uakaremen.     A  large  scarabcus  rests  on  the  head. 

4.  Handles  of  green  glazed  sistra  of  Aahmes  and  Nekht-nebef ;  one  names 
the  temple  in  Paqerhet. 

5.  Fragments  of  a  blue  paste  cup  of  Aahmes. 

6.  Fragment  of  a  green  glazed  plaque  with  falcon  name  of  Nekht-nebef. 

7.  Fragment  of  black  granite,  mentioning  either  Pankhy  or  Cambyses. 

8.  Bronze  Osiris,  with  dedication  by  Nesptah  son  of  Tayfdcn. 

9.  Bronze  Harpocrates,  with  dedication  by  Aoha-ardas  son  of  Penefu-da- 
bastet,  born  of  Peda-uazet-pe-nefu. 

10.  Bronze  Osiris,  dedicated  by  Peda-pep(?). 

11.  Fragments  of  sculptured  limestone,  of  Nekhthorheb,  one  with  the  head  of 
Nut,  and  naming  the  gods  within  the  temple  of  Paqerhet. 


29     ) 


REVIEWS. 


i 


Les  Civilisations  P reJiellcniques  da?ts  le  Bassin  de  la  Mer  Egce. — RenE 
DUSSAUD.  Large  Svo,  482  pp.,  325  figures,  13  plates.  24  frs.  (Geuthner,  Paris.) 
2nd  edition.     1914. 

This  work,  which  appeared  a  couple  of  years  ago,  has  here  been  re-issued  with 
revision  and  many  additions.  It  was  much  needed  as  a  general  view  of  the 
subject  for  those  who  cannot  have  the  large  number  of  scattered  publications  in 
which  the  discoveries  of  the  last  decade  have  appeared.  The  requirements  have 
been  well  met  in  general,  without  neglecting  any  part  of  the  wide  field.  It  is  only 
to  be  expected  that  in  such  a  range  some  part  of  the  facts  or  reasons  should  escape 
the  summarist ;  and  such  points  that  we  may  notice  here  do  not  reflect  on  the 
construction  of  the  work  as  a  whole.  We  hope  that  future  editions  will  give  scope 
for  rendering  it  still  more  suitable  and  exact.  It  will  perhaps  be  most  convenient 
here  to  give  an  outline  of  the  volume,  noting  minor  matters  by  the  way,  and  then 
to  deal  with  some  larger  questions  at  the  end. 


Keliefs  on  the  Stone  Vases  of  Hagiiia  Triada.     Scile  2  :  3. 


The  work  is  divided  into  si.x  chapters  on  different  regions,  and  two  general 
chapters  on  the  religion  and  ethnology.  Crete  naturally  comes  first,  with  81  pages, 
as  it  has  yielded  a  more  continuous  view  of  the  early  civilisations  than  any  other 
of  the  regions.  The  main  sites  are  described,  Knossos,  Phaestos,  and  Haghia 
Triada,  following  well  known  details.  No  attempt  is  made  to  explain  the  remark- 
able feature  in  these  palaces  of  the  very  wide  flights  of  steps,  35  to  45  feet  wide  ; 
they  seem  to  point  to  large  groups  or  fraternities  in  procession  having  been  a  main 
feature  of  the  religious  festivals.  The  tombs  are  described,  with  the  strange 
ossuaries,  which  seem  to  show  the  same  custom  as  in  modern  times,  of  removing 


30 


Reviews. 


skeletons  from  graves  after  two  or  three  years  and  placing  them  in  an  ossuary. 
Nine  types  of  grave  are  now  recognised,  no  one  of  which  extends  over  more  than 
three  of  the  nine  Minoan  ages. 

The  discussion  of  the  pottery,  metal  work,  painting,  and  other  arts  is  arranged 
by  periods,  and  is  fairly  complete.  The  only  regret  is  that  some  of  the  supreme 
examples  are  poorly  rendered.  The  figures  of  the  great  conical  vase  of  Haghia 
Triada  do  not  shew  the  very  important  details  of  the  helmets,  nor  other  points  ; 
and  the  cup  is  in  bad  perspective,  shortening  the  figures.  We  here  give  photographs 
from  casts  of  these,  as  they  are  not  sufficiently  known  (Figs,  i  and  2).  Another 
matter  which  yet  claims  representation  is  the  beautifully  varied  series  of  stone 
vases  from  Mochlos,  which  give  a  marked  character  to  the  early  period  (Figs.  3-7). 


Coloured  Marble  Vases  from  Mochlos, 
3,  4.  Copied  from  Egyptian. 
Influenced  by  Egypt. 

{From  Stager's  Mochlos.) 


5.  Egyptian,  VIth  Dynasty. 
7.  Typical  Cretan. 


The  exquisite  blade  of  a  dagger  from  Mochlos,  with  its  fine  arched  ribbing  and 
trefoil  ornament,  gives  perhaps  a  more  vivid  sense  of  the  taste  and  feeling  of  its 
period  than  anything  else  that  has  survived. 

The  table  of  stratification  of  Knossos  shews  the  astonishing  fact  that  the  whole 
of  the  nine  classified  periods  occupy  less  thickness  than  the  great  neolithic  stage 
beneath  them.  It  is  true  that  in  some  periods  a  great  deal  was  swept  away  when 
founding  new  buildings,  but  yet  the  classified  age  of  probably  four  thousand  years 
cannot  be  much  longer  than  the  neolithic.  We  are  thus  faced  with  a  continuous 
settled  life  in  Crete  quite  as  ancient  as  that  of  the  pre-historic  Egyptian.  In  the 
table  of  chronology  it  is  strange  how  the  consistent  and  detailed  history  left  by  the 
Egyptians  is  ignored,  as  if  it  had  no  more  foundation  than  the  vague  guesses  which 
modern  writers  try  to  substitute  for  it.     The  Egyptian  history  is  not  a  supposition 


Revieivs. 


31 


of  any  modern  writer,  but  a  consistent  mass  of  national  record  preserved  by  many 
sources,  which  very  few  people  take  the  trouble  to  understand. 

In  dealing  with  dress,  a  strange  remark  is  made  that  the  appearance  of  the 
corset  must  be  relatively  late  because  it  supposes  the  use  of  copper.  It  is  very 
doubtful  if  there  ^ver  was  a  metallic  corset  till  a  century  ago ;  probably  all  the 
peasant  corsets  of  Eastern  Europe  now  are  built  with  beech-wood  busks.  The 
curious  baggy  dress  shewn  on  a  Cretan  seal  is  closely  like  a  dress  which  came  into 
fashion  in  the  XlXth  dynasty  in  Egypt  ;  it  is  unlike  anything  before  it  in  either 
country,  and  perhaps  therefore  due  to  some  third  centre  (Figs.  8-1 1).     Unfortunately 


~r  i:.^K '  £r~u 


T-f 


Baggy  Dress,  Greek  and  Egyptian. 

8,9.  Sealings  from  Zakro.  II.  Egyptian,  XIXth  Dynasty. 

10.  Cretan  Sealing. 

no  authority  is  given  for  the  assertion  that  the  female  sphinx  is  represented  in 

Egypt   from   the   IVth  dynasty;  it  is   usually  believed  that  such  are  not  known 

before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.     Surely,  also,  the  well-known  octopus  weight  is  of 

red  gypsum  and  not  of  porphyry. 

The  second   chapter    is    on    the    Cyclades,  and    here    the   material    is   not  so 

hackneyed  as  that  of  Knossos.     A  general  outline  of  the  system  of  tombs,  and  the 

use  of  obsidian  and  metal,  comes  first.     Then  the  remains  of  Thera,  Delos,  and 

Melos ;   where  Phylakopi  with  its  succession   of  three  towns  is  described.     The 

pottery  series  of  these  towns  is  quoted  and  figured  from  Mr.  Edgar's  researches. 

It  is  expressly  stated  that  Melos  is  the  sole  source  of  obsidian  work  in  the  Aegean ; 

if  so,  it  is  remarkable  that  some  found  in  Egypt  is  referred   to   Samos  by  the 

Mineralogical   Department  of  the  British  Museum.     Obsidian  was  u.sed  together 

with  metal,  and  was  given  up  only  in  the  latter  part  of  the  bronze  age.     The 

discussion   of  lamps  leads  to  a  misunderstanding  of  a  lamp  with  a  sub-chamber, 

which  is  supposed  to  be   for    catching  drippings   of  oil.      Any  oil    that    dripped 

through  the  pottery  oil-holder  would  as  readily  soak  into  the  body  beneath.     It 

can   only  be  explained  as  a  water  chamber — not  to  keep  the  lamp  cool,  but  to 


32  Reviews. 

saturate  the  pottery,  so  that  the  oil  should  not  soak  into  it.  Such  a  system  in 
Egypt  is  described  by  Herodotus,  and  found  provided  in  the  limestone  lamps  of 
the  Xllth  dynasty. 

A  brief  chapter  is  given  to  the  Trojan  discoveries,  stating  the  stratification  of 
the  successive  cities  and  their  ages.  The  dates  are  unfortunately  given  in  the 
arbitrarily  reduced  chronology ;  it  is  much  clearer  to  keep  to  the  dynastic 
equivalents.  The  first  two  primitive  towns  were  of  the  Old  Kingdom  (IV-VI) ; 
the  great  second  age,  to  which  belonged  all  the  gold  jewellery  of  Schliemann,  is  of 
the  Middle  Kingdom  age  (XI-XIV)  ;  three  villages  fill  up  the  Hyksos  age;  and 
the  Homeric  Troy  is  of  the  XVIlIth  and  XlXth  dynasties. 

The  fourth  chapter  treats  Continental  Greece  pretty  fully.  The  great  sites  are 
described  ;  and  Malta  is  also  brought  in,  illustrated  by  pottery  and  a  figure,  though 
no  plan  or  description  is  given  of  the  great  structures  there.  The  glass  from  Spata 
is  described  as  usually  white,  more  rarely  blue  ;  the  white  is  really  a  decomposed 
blue.  It  is  stated  to  have  been  poured  liquid  into  moulds,  but  all  early  glass  was 
worked  in  a  pasty  state,  and  pressed  into  moulds.  In  the  third  period  of 
Orchomenos,  called  Minyan  by  the  excavators,  and  dated  at  Phylakopi  to  the 
Middle  Kingdom  (pp.  182-3),  the  tall-stem  cups  (p.  186)  occur  which  are  much  like 
the  Hittite  "champagne-glass"  cups  of  the  same  age  (see  Ancient  Egypt,  I,  172). 
This  strongly  points  to  some  connection,  of  trade  rather  than  of  race,  which  also 
extended  to  Egypt,  where  such  long-stemmed  cups  or  bowls  were  made  in  the 
early  part  of  the  Middle  Kingdom.  Another  remarkable  occurrence  is  that  of  the 
steatopygous  figure  in  Thessaly  with  purely  neolithic  work  of  an  early  type.  This 
is  probably  later  than  the  steatopygous  figures  of  the  French  caves,  bat  perhaps 
before  the  similar  figures  of  Malta.  An  interesting  remark  is  that  the  mainland 
buildings  have  fronts  with  two  pillars  and  three  openings,  whereas  the  Cretan  style 
is  with  one  pillar  dividing  the  entrance  in  two.  Such  is  also  the  style  of  rock 
tombs  in  Palestine,  perhaps  derived  from  the  Cretan  invasion.  The  supposed 
Phoenician  sources  of  the  Mykenaean  culture  is  rightly  repudiated  ;  the  Phoenician 
power  arose  much  later  than  growth  of  any  pre-hellenic  civilisation.  Some  brief 
notice  is  given  of  the  Sicilian,  Italian,  and  Iberic  connections,  the  latter  of  which  is, 
however,  very  uncertain. 

Cyprus  is  treated  at  length ;  as  a  land  of  such  a  secondary  art  it  receives  undue 
notice  compared  with  the  original  styles  of  other  lands.  The  miserable  mismanage- 
ment of  its  antiquities  during  British  occupation  is  described,  as  well  as  the  earlier 
frauds  of  Cesuola.  Prof  Myres'  work  is  recognised  as  the  basis  of  scientific 
classification,  and  the  different  periods  of  the  pottery  are  fully  stated.  The  metal 
work  is  also  well  described.  The  largest  copper  adze  found  in  Cyprus  (Fig.  185,  12) 
is  of  exactly  the  form  of  the  copper  adzes  of  the  1st  dynasty  in  Egypt,  some  of 
which  are  half  as  large  again.  This  points  to  Cypriote  copper  being  already  worked 
at  that  date. 

The  whole  question  of  the  thrusting  and  cutting  weapons  is  hardly  put  in 
shape.  An  entire  distinction  should  be  made  between  the  rapier  and  dagger 
with  inid-rib,  which  are  for  thrusting,  and  the  flat  sword  and  flat  dagger  with 
rounded  end,  which  are  used  for  cutting.  The  mid-rib  type  belongs  to  pre-historic 
Egypt,  Cyprus,  and  Mykenae ;  the  flat  blade  is  found  in  Syria,  and  the  Hyksos 
and  XVIIIth  dynasty  periods.  The  varieties  of  attachment  are  noted  by  rivets  or 
by  a  tang,  but  the  meaning  of  the  difference  is  not  noted.  The  rivets  are  required 
for  attachment  to  handles  of  ivory  or  horn,  the  short  round  handles  generally  used 
for  thrusting ;  the  tang  is  intended  to  fit  through  a  longer  handle  of  wood  or  bone. 


Reviews. 


33 


grarped  by  the  whole  hand,  and  more  generally  used  for  slashing.  A  doubt  is 
expi  jssed  whether  the  Aegean  smiths  influenced  those  of  Europe  and  Scandinavia  ; 
the  evidence  of  the  diffusion  of  spiral  design  should  suffice  to  shew  such  influence, 
if  not,  indeed,  a  real  family  of  work. 

In  the  chapter  on  the  Aegean  influence  in  Egypt  and  Syria  the  author  seems 
to  be  less  at  home  in  his  material.  He  states  that  in  the  1st  dynasty  the  Egyptian 
texts  call  the  population  of  the  Aegean  isles  Hanebu.  Certainly  there  is  nothing 
until  late  times  to  shew  where  the  Hanebu  lived,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to 
have  any  reference  to  the  Hanebu  so  early  as  the  1st  dynasty.  The  black  ware  of 
the  1st  dynasty  at  Abydos,  which  is  absolutely  identical  with  that  made  in 
Knossos,  is  quite  ignored  ;  as  also  arc 
the  northern  decorated  vases  found  in 
the  Royal  Tombs  and  at  Abusir.  What- 
ever may  be  their  source — Aegean, 
Asianic  or  Syrian,  at  present  unfixed, 
they  shew  an  important  trade  connection 
with  the  no.  th.  Also  the  great  mass  of 
fragments  of  over  700  Mykenaean  vases 
found  at  Tel.  el-Amarna  is  barely  hinted 
in  a  footnote.  Thus  the  most  important 
connections,  1  v  their  age,  and  by  their 
numbers,  scarv  ^ly  appear,  and  the  pro- 
portions of  the  historical  connection  with 
Egypt  are  not  shewn.  With  a  char- 
acteristic disregard  of  the  reader,  not  a 
single  illustration  is  given  of  the  Old  or 
Middle  Kingdom  connections, except  one 
at  the  end  of  the  chapter  ;  while  pottery 
of  the  iron  age,  'rem  Cyprus,  is  thrust 
into  the  early  Egyptian  discussion. 

The  Egyptian  gryphon  of  Mentu  is 
said  to  be  derived  from  the  Mykenaean 
gryphon,  but  the  derivation  is  clearly 
from  Egypt  to  Greece.  Less  than  eight 
pages  are  given  to  the  Egyptian  relations, 
although  they  are  the  basis  of  the  history ; 
which  are  quite  insufficient. 

The  Syrian  and  Cypriote  connections  are  much  more  fully  handled.  There  is 
no  hint  as  to  the  abundant  Egyptian  dating  of  the  brown  bilbih;  these  are  here 
classed  as  Cypriote,  with  imitations  from  Syria.  The  best  part  of  the  chapter  is 
the  discussion  of  the  bowls  with  rows  of  imitations  of  Assyrian  and  Egyptian 
subjects,  dating  from  about  700-550  B.C.  While  Poulseii  would  put  them  to  the 
credit  of  the  Phoenicians,  Dussaud  gives  reasons,  from  the  Aramaic  dedications 
and  the  subjects,  for  their  being  Cypriote.  Some  assertions  seem  to  need  support. 
That  "  the  primitive  potter  was  often  a  nomad  "  is  hard  to  reconcile  with  the 
regular  use  of  skin,  wood,  and  basket  vessels  by  nomads,  ancient  and  modern. 
There  is  not  a  chip  of  pottery  to  be  found  on  the  South  Palestine  sites,  even 
though  they  were  settled  towns  for  ages,  because  the  nomad  usages  prevailed. 
The  long  series  of  types  of  Syrian  pottery  published  by  the  Palestine  Fund  are  quite 
ignored.     The   Gezer  game-board  (Fig.   217)   is   called   an  idol,  although    it    is    a 

C 


I'oiTERY  Game-board  of  60  holes. 
XIIth  Dynasty,  Kahun. 


and   only  four  illustrations   appear, 


34  Reviews. 

well  known  type  found  in  ijcrfection  in  Susa,  with  exactly  the  same  system  of  holes 
for  recording  like  a  cribbagc  board  ;  and  it  is  also  found  with  the  same  holes  in 
Egypt  (Fig.  12).  That  a  counting  game-board  was  modified  to  a  suggestion  of  the 
human  figure  does  not  imply  any  religious  meaning.  The  body  of  the  chariot  on 
the  Enkomi  ivory  is  .said  to  be  derived  from  Assyria  ;  but  just  the  same  form 
occurs  long  before,  from  the  tomb  of  Amenhotep  II  at  Thebes.  The  Tridacna 
shells  with  Assyrian  motives  are  illustrated,  and  their  Cypriote  origin  considered. 
A  fine  plate  shews  the  strongly  Assyrian  style  of  the  votive  bucklers  from  Crete ; 
this  was  perhaps  due  to  direct  influence  through  A3ia  Minor,  as  there  is  nothing  of 
Cypriote  style  traceable.  On  the  whole,  M.  Uussaud  inclines  to  give  Cyprus 
a  much  more  important  place  than  would  seem  warranted  by  the  entirely  borrowed 
sources  of  its  work,  from  Egypt  and  Assyria.  It  was  only  original  in  its 
clumsiness  and  poverty  of  design. 

The  chapter  on  Cults  and  Myths  takes  us  back  to  the  refreshing  originality  of 
Crete.  The  seals,  frescoes,  and  figures  of  religious  subjects  are  fully  given,  and 
their  meaning  discussed,  in  a  chapter  which  is  the  longest  in  the  volume.  Of 
course  the  Cretan  cross  is  figured,  but  no  mention  is  made  of  it  in  the  text  ;  at 
least  it  should  be  remarked  that  the  stem  of  it  is  a  conjectural  restoration. 

The  last  chapter,  on  the  Aegean  Peoples,  deals  with  different  branches  of  the 
civilisation,  as  well  as  the  ethnology.  The  shipping  is  well  illustrated ;  but  in  the 
alphabet  question,  which  occupies  sixteen  pages,  there  is  apparently  no  consciousness 
of  the  fact  that  the  signs  discussed  were  all  used  by  the  Mediterranean  peoples  and 
in  Egypt  long  before  the  Phoenicians.  The  Phoenician  tradition  dominates,  and 
it  is  said  that  the  prototype  alphabet  must  have  been  composed  of  twenty-two  letters 
identical  with  those  of  the  Phoenician  alphabet.  The  regular  scheme  of  repetition 
which  is  imbedded  in  the  alphabetic  order  proves  that  much  is  missing,  and  that 
much  has  been  added  to  the  prototype  alphabet.  Further  on,  we  find  a  similarly 
antiquated  point  of  view  as  to  the  identity  of  the  Mediterranean  peoples  named  in 
Egypt ;  for  we  here  see  Sagalassos,  Sardes,  Ilion,  Dardanians,  and  others  doing 
duty  as  they  did  fifty  years  ago.  Modern  work  has  put  the  whole  subject  in 
a  different  point  of  view. 

VVc  may  now  turn  to  some  of  the  general  questions  involved  in  this  work. 
There  are  important  historical  data  as  to  the  rise  of  the  civilisations  of  certain 
lands.  In  the  Cyclades  there  is  no  neolithic  period,  and  they  do  not  appear  to 
have  been  inhabited  before  the  copper  age  (p.  lOo).  The  western  coast  of  Asia 
Minor,  excepting  the  Troad,  does  not  .seem  to  have  had  any  civilisation  before  the 
age  of  the  XVII  Ith  dynasty  (p.  203).  The  Akhaian  invasion  of  Greece,  about  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  brought  probably  the  earliest  Indo-European  speech  to  that 
peninsula  (p.  441).     These  are  all  landmarks  of  importance  in  the  early  ages. 

An  unexpected  boundary  to  the  Aegean  culture  is  presented  by  Thessaly, 
where  there  is  no  link  with  the  south  before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  but  on  the 
contrary  a  neolithic  age  and  a  copper  age  which  are  a  whole  cycle  later  than 
elsewhere  (p.  190).  Moreover,  Sicily  and  Southern  Italy  are  linked  with  the  style 
of  NjDrthern  Greece  down  to  that  time.  It  is  only  in  the  Mykenaean  stage,  late 
bronze  age,  that  Northern  Greece  and  the  West,  with  the  whole  length  of  the 
Adriatic,  came  into  line  with  the  Aegean  (p.  212).  We  must  realise,  therefore,  that 
the  Cretan  civilisation  touched  its  bounds  on  the  west  and  north,  near  by  in  the 
Peloponnesus,  while  it  stretched  out  on  the  other  side  to  Egypt  and  Syria. 

A  valuable  table  at  the  end  shows  the  relative  periods  of  nine  different  regions  ; 
the  equivalence  of  the  stages  side  by  side  enables  the  comparisons  to  be  readil)' 


Reviews.  3  5 

grasped,  and  we  need  not  complicate  it  by  the  very  questionable  dating  in  years. 
One  of  the  most  significant  results  is  the  difference  in  the  introduction  of  bronze. 
In  Crete,  the  Cyclades,  Troy,  and  Cyprus  bronze  appears  in  the  age  of  the  Xllth 
dynasty ;  yet  Egypt  then  remained  in  the  copper  age,  and  bronze  does  not 
regularly  appear  there  till  later.  This  bears  strongly  on  the  origin  of  bronze, 
shewing  that  the  fm  came  from  the  north,  and  not  from  the  east.  The  abundance 
of  bronze  at  an  early  period  in  Hungary  suggests  that  the  Zinnwald  may  have 
been  the  source  of  tin  then,  as  it  has  been  in  later  ages. 

Regarding  the  chronology  followed  in  the  table  and  elsewhere,  it  is  a  remark- 
able admission  that  the  strongest  reason  to  be  found  for  the  short  dating  is  that 
the  palace  of  Knossos  of  the  XVHIth  dynasty  age  is  built  upon  the  foundations 
of  that  of  the  XII  Ith  dynasty  (p.  56).  As  the  whole  ground  was  cleared  for  the 
later  building  the  superposition  must  be  expected,  whether  the  interval  were  one 
or  ten  centuries  ;  and  it  no  more  shows  a  connection  of  age  than  do  our  modern 
buildings  of  London  which  cut  into  the  Roman  wall.  Each  case  only  shows  that 
a  thorough  clearance  of  loose  soil  was  made.  There  seems  to  be  not  a  single  clear 
piece  of  evidence  to  set  against  the  solid  and  consistent  history  given  by  the 
Egyptians.  An  excellent  warning  against  assuming  that  similar  things  are 
contemporary  is  given  on  p.  62  ;  to  which  we  may  add  that  the  larnax,  or  pottery- 
box  coffin,  belonging  to  about  1200  B.C.  in  Crete,  is  identical  with  that  made  at  the 
beginning  of  the  1st  dynasty  in  Egypt,  two  thousand  years  before,  even  on  the 
shortest  reckoning. 

A  very  important  assumption  is  that  of  Alashiya  (which  is  so  frequently 
named  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty)  being  the  same  as  Cyprus  (p.  248).  The  question 
of  the  position  of  Alashiya  is  not  discussed,  and  the  minute  study  of  all  the 
evidence  by  Mr.  VVainwrlght  is  never  mentioned.  That  writer's  exhaustive  con- 
sideration of  the  land  of  Keftiu  is  summarily  rejected  without  any  reason  (p.  199). 
The  whole  question  should  be  much  more  thought  out  by  M.  Dussaud.  He 
attributes  much  importance  to  Cyprus,  while  Mr.  Hall  has  lately  shown  that 
Cyprus  and  Egypt  had  very  slight  contact.  We  find  continually  the  assumption 
that  Kaphtor,  Keftiu,  and  Crete  were  all  identical,  and  that  Alashiya  was  Cyprus, 
one  word  being  substituted  for  the  other  without  any  hint  that  the  author  is 
translating  his  facts  by  surmises.  We  see  that  Mr.  Wainwright — exhaustively 
using  all  the  facts  and  keeping  strictly  to  them — finds  that  there  is  no  confusion  or 
mistake  in  the  Egyptian  paintings  of  details.  His  results  are  therefore  certainly 
preferable  to  those  of  our  author,  who  concludes  of  the  Keftiu  that  "  the  detail  is 
not  always  comprehensible  "  (p.  285),  and  "often  the  artists  put  more  haste  than 
conscience  in  their  work,  and  we  have  the  proof  of  it  when  they  mix,  in  the  hands 
of  foreigners,  Egyptian  with  exotic  products,  or  when  they  attribute  Aegean  vases 
to  neighbouring  peoples  such  as  the  Retenu  of  Syria"  (p.  287).  When  assumptions 
are  so  freely  made  as  to  identifications,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  confusion  of 
the  modern  writer  should  be  attributed  to  the  ancient  painter. 

The  reader's  difficulties  have  been  thoughtfully  met  in  one  way,  by  giving  a 
warning  when  two  sites  of  similar  names  might  be  confounded.  Other  difficulties 
are  not  sufficiently  considered,  as  there  is  hardly  enough  systematic  grouping  put 
forward.  Tables  of  the  periods  and  localities,  placed  before  each  chapter,  would 
enable  a  reader  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  descriptions  much  more  easily.  In  one 
case  it  is  needful  to  track  from  a  description  on  p.  loi  to  find  the  types  stated  on 
pp.  107-8,  and  then  to  go  back  to  the  illustration  on  p.  85.  The  general  description 
seems  to   have   been  written   first,  and   the  precise   facts   and   figures   dropped  in 

C  2 


36  Reviews. 

afterwards.  The  main  grievance  is  that  the  figures  and  text  so  often  part  company  ; 
the  view  of  Phaestos  is  put  into  the  account  of  Knossos,  the  plan  and  view  of 
Haghia  Triada  into  the  text  of  Phaestos,  the  most  important  subjects  on  pp.  67-70 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  text  there,  the  weight  from  Knossos  is  put  into  the 
Cyclad  tomb  chapter,  the  descriptions  on  pp.  101,  169,  and  313  have  no  references 
given  to  the  illustrations,  which  are  strayed  far  away,  and  there  is  no  description  to 
Fig.  279.  The  whole  adjustment  of  figures  and  text  should  be  sternh-  kept  in 
hand  by  the  author,  and  the  printer  not  allowed  to  make  such  confusion.  The 
publisher  keeps  to  the  disastrous  custom  of  paper  covers  that  will  not  hold  together. 
A  volume  of  nearly  500  pages  of  thick  heavy  paper,  lightly  stitched  and  unbound, 
will  not  bear  any  opening  without  falling  to  pieces.  When  will  French  publishers 
put  a  sixpenny  board  cover  on  books  costing  a  pound,  so  as  to  save  them 
from  ruin  ? 

It  is  greatly  to  be  hoped  that  the  present  troubles  will  not  long  dela\-  a  third 
edition  of  this  valuable  summar\-,  improved  by  more  systematic  treatment  and 
further  study.  There  is  no  other  work  which  gives  so  useful  and  complete  a  survey 
of  one  of  the  greatest  advances  in  ancient  history. 

Aegean  Archaeology. — By  H.  R.  Hall.  8vo,  263  pp.,  ^t,  plates,  112  figures. 
\2s.6d.     1914.     (Lee  Warner.) 

This  volume  gives  a  well-ordered  and  systematic  account  of  the  pre-Hellenic 
civilisation  in  its  various  branches.  The  material  is  of  course  familiar  to  those  who 
have  read  recent  books,  and  there  is  no  fresh  light  on  the  subject ;  but  for  many 
readers  who  wish  for  a  connected  view  of  what  they  only  know  by  stra>-  fragments, 
this  will  be  a  valuable  handbook.  The  full  references  will  serve  as  a  key  to  the 
more  detailed  publications.  One  ma>'  only  regret  that  so  many  things  are  mentioned 
without  any  illustration  ;  really  a  portfolio  of  everything  that  is  known  in  this 
subject  is  what  is  much  wanted  now  for  students. 

An  outline  of  all  the  e.xcavations  and  sites  serves  first  of  all  to  put  the  reader 
in  touch  with  the  localities  and  course  of  discovery.  Early  Troy  is  carefulh^  fenced 
out,  as  not  being  Aegean  in  culture ;  yet,  as  it  is  on  the  Aegean,  whatever  is  there 
found  is  in  "Aegean  archaeology,"  and  deserves  to  come  in  as  much  as  any  other 
culture.  The  stone  and  metal  work  occupies  the  next  chapter,  noting  especially 
the  vases  with  reliefs.  A  full  account  is  given  of  the  varieties  and  styles  of  pottery, 
both  of  Crete  and  the  Cyclades ;  and  the  iinportance  of  pottery  is  emphasized,  as 
being  continually  changing,  abundant,  and  not  worked  up  again  like  metal  objects. 

The  town  and  palace  plans  are  discussed  in  detail  and  illustrated.  Another 
chapter  deals  with  the  shrines  and  tombs.  Decoration,  painting  and  sculpture  are 
fairly  e.xemplified.  The  writing  is  described,  but  some  example  of  the  Cretan 
language,  as  preserved  in  Greek  letters,  would  have  been  of  interest,  to  give  an  idea 
of  the  sounds  actually  used.  Lastly  the  surprising  costume  is  described,  and  the 
weapons  and  tools.  Thus  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  type  of  life  and  methods  of 
the  civilisation  is  fairly  given. 

Some  slight  oversights  may  be  noticed.  Red  porphyry  is  named  more  than 
once,  though  on  the  next  page  (66)  it  is  correctly  called  purple  gypsum.  It  is 
suggested  that  the  Egyptian  "  neolithic  "  potters  turned  to  making  stone  vases  on 
the  introduction  of  metal  (p.  72) ;  but  metal  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the 
grinding  of  .stone  vases,  and  the  stonework  fell  off  along  with  the  pottery,  and 
decayed  as  metal  came  into  use.  The  lustrous  black  ware  is  not  turned  red  by 
overfiring  (p.  74)  but  by  access  of  air  in  the  burning.     The  sloping-sided  door  is 


Reviews.  37 

not  "  Egyptian  "  (p.  122),  being  never  found  in  Egypt.  Grey  colour  was  often  used 
in  Egypt  (p.  179),  generally  for  grounds,  as  at  Saqqareh,  Meydum,  and  Qurneh. 
The  sword  and  rapier  are  confused,  as  is  usual  (pp.  247-9) ;  the  dagger  can  scarcely 
be  derived  from  the  spear-head,  as  it  is  much  older  in  Egypt,  and  was  probably  a 
more  primitive  form  of  flint  weapon. 

In  general,  we  may  welcome  the  prominence  of  the  real  bases  of  archaeology — 
the  importance  of  pottery  as  a  dating  material — the  partial  repudiation  of  the  fable 
that  objects  "  work  down "  in  strata,  the  supposed  instances  shewing  merely 
unobservant  digging — the  remark  that  it  is  easy  to  go  wrong  over  the  time  intervals 
between  strata.  Mr.  Hall  condemns  the  German  habit  of  framing  theories  regardless 
of  facts,  as  illustrated  b}-  the  solar  theories  of  Max  Miiller  and  his  school,  which 
captivated  an  ignorant  world  ;  and  it  is  well  said  that  "  Archaeology  then  came  to 
the  rescue  of  history  from  the  morass  into  which  philology  had  dragged  her." 
There  is,  however,  another  Germanism  which  strangely  is  still  in  full  force  in  this 
book — the  Berlin  theory  of  Egyptian  chronology,  which  defies  all  the  history  and 
the  collateral  facts  which  support  it.  Archaeology  will  not  come  into  her  own 
until  facts  rule  and  theories  serve.  Mr.  Hall  shews  in  this  book  a  freer  style  than 
usual,  with  more  comparisons,  and  more  enthusiasm,  which  well  befits  the  intro- 
ductory purpose  of  such  a  volume. 

The  Tomb  of  Hcsy. — By  J.  E.  QuiBELL.  4to,  40  pp.,  32  plates.  56  frs.  25. 
1913.     (Cairo  Museum  ;  Ouaritch.) 

It  is  singular  how  little  has  been  known  of  the  tombs  from  which  the  most 
celebrated  works  have  been  brought.  The  figures  of  Rahetep  and  Nefert  came 
from  tombs  at  Meydum,  which  were  left  neglected  till  the  beauty  of  the  sculpture 
was  ruined,  and  were  afterwards  largely  destroyed  ;  the  tombs  of  the  Sheykh 
el  Beled  statue,  and  of  the  panels  of  Hesy,  at  Saqqareh,  had  been  lost  to  sight,  and 
it  is  only  by  hunting  up  memories  of  half  a  century  ago  that  Mr.  Quibell  has 
recovered  the  clues  from  the  last  surviving  workmen  of  Mariette. 

At  the  north  of  Saqqareh,  above  the  village  of  Abusir,  a  cemetery  of  some 
500  mastabas  has  been  recently  cleared  ;  they  were  nearly  all  small,  and  not  of 
individual  interest.  Among  the  few  large  ones,  that  on  the  top  of  the  hill  was  the 
most  important,  built  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ilird  dynasty  for  the  great  official 
Hesy,  or  Ra-hesy,  "rewarded  by  Ra."  This  is  141  feet  long  and  69  wide;  but  at 
first  it  was  only  about  half  that  size  each  way,  and  was  enlarged  twice  or  three 
times.  It  still  stands  sixteen  feet  high,  but  was  originally  much  higher.  In  the 
second  facade  which  was  built  were  placed  the  celebrated  wooden  panels  in  the 
recesses  of  the  false  doors.  There  were  originally  eleven,  but  only  five  and  a 
fragment  of  another  remained  undecayed.  Of  these  panels  excellent  photographs 
are  given  in  this  volume,  of  which  we  reproduce,  in  our  portraits,  one  which  is  not 
usually  known.  The  wall  which  enclosed  this  facade,  forming  a  narrow  corridor, 
had  painted  on  it  a  .series  of  offerings ;  these  were  discovered  by  Mr.  Quibell, 
and  the  careful  drawings  of  the  paintings  form  the  most  important  part  of  the 
publication. 

The  first  question  that  arises  is  whether  this  long  series  of  elaborate  paintings 
are  of  the  actual  .size  of  the  objects.  As  these  are  by  far  the  earliest  paintings  of 
property,  and  are  remarkably  detailed,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  they  would  be 
made  like  the  objects,  not  only  in  form  and  colour,  but  also  in  actual  size.  A 
difficulty  in  the  enquiry  is  that  not  a  single  plate  has  any  scale  on  it,  except  the 
plans ;  nor  is  any  scale  stated  in  the  text  except  that  of  a  plate  of  fragments  and 

c  3 


38  .  Reviews. 

one  of  patterns,  not  even  the  stone  and  pottery  vases  have  any  hint  of  size  to 
them.  From  three  chance  mentions  of  the  length  of  objects  it  may  be  gathered 
that  the  scale  is  i  to  1 14  of  reduction  from  the  wall  drawings  in  the  plates.  The 
scale  of  the  detailed  figures  in  the  text,  and  of  the  coloured  plates,  varies  without 
any  rule,  or  any  scale  attached.  This  omission  is  a  .serious  bar  to  making  u.se  of 
.so  elaborate  and  costly  a  publication.  Taking,  however,  the  scale  of  I  to  ir4  for 
the  wall  plates,  it  appears  that  the  actual  sizes  of  some  paintings  are  as  follow  : — 
copper  axes,  3J  to  4  inches  wide;  handle.s,  19  to  20  inches  long;  balance  beams, 
8  to  13J  inches  long;  alabaster  tables,  16-4  inches  diameter,  57  to  64  inches  high  ; 
tent  pole,  83  inches  long;  boxes,  15J  to  16  inches  square;  seat,  13  inches  wide, 
iii  inches  high — seats  are  usually  narrow,  those  from  Qurneh  were  \-\  inches 
wide,  10  inches  high,  others  I2i  and  11  inches  wide;  bed-frame  poles,  57,40,  6-,}., 
63  inches  long — actual  bed  poles  are,  half  of  them,  about  70  inches,  and  the  other 
half  38  to  62  inches ;  sekhem  sceptre,  238  inches  long,  agreeing  with  usual  pro- 
portion to  a  figure ;  head  rests,  73  inches  high,  60  inches  wide — actual  head-rests 
average  75  inches  high,  and  50  to  77  inches  wide.  Thus  in  each  case  the  painted 
figures  seem  to  be  well  within  the  usual  variation  of  the  actual  sizes  of  such  objects, 
and  we  may  be  justified  in  regarding  them  as  having  been  directly  measured  off 
from  the  objects  themselves.  The  importance  of  this  we  shall  see  presently.  We 
will  now  follow  Mr.  Quibell's  description  of  the  paintings,  with  further  discussion 
of  their  real  meanings. 

All  over  the  false  door  front  of  the  mastaba  are  painted  the  elaborate  chequer 
patterns  which  are  well  known  on  early  tombs;  they  are  here  shown  with  a  row 
of  loops  along  the  bottom  edge  by  which  the  coloured  material  is  lashed  down  to 
a  bar  along  the  top  of  the  dado.  Evidently  they  were  original!)'  woven  hangings, 
the  detail  of  which  is  here  copied.  The  strange  white-on-black  chain  pattern  is 
here,  but  is  still  quite  ine.xplicable. 

At  the  dark  inner  end  of  the  long  corridor  are  painted  four  lamps  on  tall  stands, 
40  inches  high,  in  the  position  where  such  lamps  would  be  needed.  The  outer 
wall  of  the  corridor  has,  at  the  inner  end,  just  the  foot  showing  of  a  life-size  figure 
of  Hesy.  At  his  side  arc  three  cases  for  papyri,  doubtless  the  registers  of  his 
property.  Before  him  is  first  the  serpent  game ;  it  has  seven  coils  divided  into 
over  500  sections.  Before  it  is  a  tray  with  three  lions  and  three  animals,  which 
are  most  like  lionesses,  yet  they  wear  collars  as  tamed  animals.  With  these  are 
six  groups  of  si.K  balls  each,  apparently  twelve  black,  twelve  red,  and  twelve  yellow. 
There  is  at  Saqqareh  a  scene  of  playing  the  serpent  game  with  balls  on  the  divisions 
of  it ;  these  balls  and  lions  belong,  therefore,  to  the  game  here. 

By  this  is  the  usual  10  x  3  game  board,  with  numbering  beginning  at  the 
bottom  right  hand,  as  in  later  times.  The  tray  of  pieces  contains  two  rows  of 
seven  men  of  the  usual  thimble  shape,  and  four  gaming  reeds,  two  with  black  cross 
lines  and  two  with  red.  These  reeds  were,  therefore,  u.sed  to  throw — like  dice — to 
show  a  chance  number. 

A  third  game  is  a  long  narrow  board  divided  across  in  si.xteen  yellow  bands, 
alternating  with  si.xteen  narrower  green  bands.  The  tray  of  pieces  with  this  contains 
five  black  and  five  white  tablets,  like  blank  dominoes. 

Three  trays  of  tools  lie  beside  the  games ;  they  are  nearly  alike,  and  the  best 
preserved  painting  shows  the  saw,  axe,  three  chisels  of  different  widths,  drill,  bow 
for  drill  (?),  drill  cap,  and  two  stone  hammers,  or  polishers. 

Below  the  tools  are  two  trays,  each  containing  two  balance  beams  of  different 
lengths,  and  two  sets  of  weights  (Fig.  i).     The  .smaller  set,  of  11,  is   too   much 


Reviews. 


39 


damaged  to  trace  its  system.  The  larger  set  of  lo  is  numbered  from  lo  up  to  lOO; 
the  sizes  impl\'  that  the  thickness  of  the  weights  increased  proportionately  to  the 
length  and  breadth.  Taking  the  largest,  of  lOO  units,  it  is  5'22  x  2'88  inches  by 
the  drawing,  or  exactly  15  square  inches  ;  at  the  usual  gravity  of  hard  stone,  27, 
this  would  be  10,200  grains  for  each  inch  of  thickness.  The  usual  thickness  for 
such  stone  weight  is  about  half  their  width,  so  that  it  would  be  about  14,000  or 
15,000  grains.  This  is  just  the  lOO  qedet  weight.  If  of  the  gold  standard  it  would 
need  to  be  2  inches  thick,  which  is  a  less  likely  proportion.  In  the  second  tray  the 
set  of  small  weights  seem  to  be  replaced  by  a  set  of  small  measures  of  capacity. 
That  very  small  bulk  measures  were  used,  we  know  by  the  set  of  bronze  cups  from 
Nubt,  which  were  for  measuring  gold  dust,  in  a  long  binary  series  from  \  to  -^^  of 
a  dchen.     {Xaqada,  p.  67.) 


I.  Tray  wnii  Balance  Beams  anij  Weights  Numbered  10  no  100. 
Tomb  of  Ra-uesy. 


Next  arc  two  mysterious  objects,  nearly  12  x  14  inches,  which  might  possibly 
be  a  kind  of  sieve  formed  of  narrow  strips  of  wood,  used  in  searching  for  precious 
stones.  Beyond  are  two  red  leather  bags  of  about  the  same  size,  with  necks  falling 
over  and  tied ;  perhaps  used  for  .storing  precious  stones  or  gold.  Two  circular 
stone  tables  on  conical  stems,  which  follow,  are  of  the  type  usual  in  the  earlj^ 
dynasties. 

The  most  remarkable  group  of  the  whole  now  appears,  two  series,  each  of  14, 
of  graded  measures  of  capacity :  the  upper  series  made  of  wooden  staves,  coopered 
with  top,  bottom,  and  middle  bands  (Fig.  2)  ;  the  lower  series,  coloured  red,  probably 
of  thin  beaten  copper.  On  comparing  these  two  sets  they  are  seen  to  be  of  the  same 
series  of  sizes  in  both  materials.  As  the  copper  must  have  been  thin,  the  wood 
must  also  have  been  very  thin  for  the  contents  to  be  alike.  The  wooden  set  is 
evidently  for  dry  measure,  the  metal  set  for  liquids.  Each  measure  nearly  follows 
the  modern  rule  that  the  depth  is  equal  to  the  diameter.  As  we  have  already  seen 
that  the  sizes  of  the  drawings  are  probably  the  same  as  that  of  the  objects,  and  that 
this  is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  weights,  we  may  now  apply  this  result  to  the 
measures.  The  diameter  is  obvious,  and  the  thickness  of  the  metal  would  not 
appreciably  alter  the  capacity.  The  depth  should  be  measured  from  the  top  of  the 
bottom  band,  as  probably  showing  the  internal  depth.     On  extracting  these,  and 

C  4 


40 


Revieivs. 


taking  the  average  of  the  two  series  (or  stating  both  if  very  different)  we  have  the 
following  results  in  cubic  inches: — 
cubic  inches. 

960     32  X  300 
502     i6x3r4 


960 
502 
378 
190 

91 

58-2 
27-5 

21-8 

9 
.      3 

r8-6 
Vri 
5-3 
37 
30 
2-4 


(is- 


{ 


582 
27-5 


37 


2  X  29-1 
I  X27-5 


1  X  292 
\  X  29-6 


378 

190 
9' 


16x236 
8  X  237 
4X  227 


2Vt 


PS-' 
In-. 


I  X2r8 

i  X22'6 


5-3 


X  212 


24    \  X  19-2 


In  the  first  column  are  the  whole  of  the  measures.  In  the  second  column  it  is 
seen  how  si.x  of  them  closely  agree  in  a  binary  series  ;  and  in  the  third  column 
seven  others  agree  in  another  binary  series,  as  nearly  as  can  be  expected  from  the 
wall  drawings  and  modern  copies  from  them.  The  unit  of  the  second  column  is 
between  29  and  30  cubic  inches  ;  that  of  the  third  column  is  about  23  cubic  inches. 


Drawings  ui-  Two  Wouoe.n  .MLV.^UKiih  ui-   10  an; 


llONS 


lOMi;  lU'  Ka-ui-iV. 


Tlie  Egyptian  hon  was  292  +  '5  cubic  inches,  agreeing  with  the  second  column. 
The  Syrian  saton  or  sabitha  was  740  cubic  inches,  which  -f-  32  is  23" i  cubic  inches. 
This  is  also  jV  of  the  tssaron,  or  yj^  of  the  ephu  of  Hebrew  measure.  As  the  tomb 
is  fillbd  with  sand  to  preserve  it,  an  exact  measurement  of  these  most  important 
points  cannot  be  made  until  some  day  when  it  may  be  re-opened.  Even  as  the 
facts  now  stand  we  seem  to  have  here  data  of  the  first  importance  for  ancient 
metrology,  as  there  are  few  good  determinations  of  capacity  measures,  and  those  of 
a  late  date.  We  need  now  exact  measurements  to  a  hundredth  of  an  inch  of  all 
these  drawings  of  weights  and  measures. 


Reviews. 


41 


Beyond  are  four  chests  on  legs  ornamented  with  rows  of  zed  and  tliet  signs 
(Fig.  3)  ;  the  latter  was  also  found  as  an  amulet  of  yellow  glaze  and  of  blue  glaze. 
With  the  chests  are  four  larger  chests  or  trays.  Above  these  are  8  poles,  from  4r5 
to  64'6  inches  long,  and  5  tent  poles  of  83"0  and  87  inches  long. 

Ne.xt  are  three  high  chairs,  one  with  a  back  ;  also  a  low  seat  with  a  back  and 
one  without,  bothi>aving  bulls'  legs  as  in  the  1st  dynast)'.  A  bed  frame,  61x22  inches, 
is  over  these  ;  it  has  the  sacking  stretched  by  a  cord, 
looping  it  to  the  frame  all  round.  Following  this  are 
two  sloping  wooden  bedsteads  (?),  62  inches  long ; 
a  sloping  couch  with  stretched  sacking,  ^^j  inches  long ; 
a  sloping  bedstead  of  62  inches ;  and  four  bedsteads 
with  head  frames,  63  inches  long.  It  is  a  surprise  to  see 
how  generally  the  actual  couch  frames  found  in  graves 
are  much  shorter  than  the  height  of  a  person.  We  are 
driven  to  suppose  that  the  early  Egyptian  usually  slept 
contracted  on  the  side,  in  the  attitude  of  the  burials. 

There  ne.xt  follow  two  rows  of  boxes  and  baskets, 
of  which  eighteen  remain.  Among  the  articles  in  them 
are  two  sekhem  sceptres  ;  three  headrests,  one  carved  in 

one  piece,  one  with  a  column  and  abacus  stem,  and  one  with  two  columns,  an 
interesting  variety  all  dated  together ;  a  tray  of  eye  paints  ;  a  tray  with  scribe's 
palettes,  colours,  and  water  pots  ;  two  trays  with  tweezers  of  the  1st  dynasty  shape, 
and  wig  curlers  (?) ;  coils  of  thread  and  string,  and  stone  vases,  come  next  ;  boxes 
with  domed  lids  that  cover  them  over  contain  stone  bowls  of  the  gap-mouth  type  of 
the  Old  Kingdom,  and  circular  stone  tables. 

This  tomb,  dated  to  the  beginning  of  the  Ilird  dynasty  by  a  sealing  of  King 
Neter-khet,  forms  a  landmark  in  the  early  civili.sation  ;  it  fixes  the  forms  of  vases 
and  tools  in  the  intermediate  time  between  the  Royal  Tombs  and  the  pyramid 
tombs  ;  it  also  gives  a  most  unexpected  light  on  the  metrology.  Every  detail  of 
woven  pattern  in  the  cloths,  of  the  form  of  furniture,  of  the  shapes  of  hieroglyphs, 
is  full  of  interest  in  the  history  of  Egyptian  civilisation.  Happily,  thanks  to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Quibell,  it  has  all  been  published  almost  as  fully  as  we  can  wish,  and 
we  hope  that  the  questions  remaining  will  be  settled  next  time  that  the  tomb  can 
be  unearthed. 


3.    Casket  Shewino  zi-n 
AND  TifiiT  Decoration. 

Tomb  of  Ra-hesy. 


T/ic  Life  ami  Times  of  Cleopatra,  Queen  of  Egypt,  a  Study  in  the  Origin  of  tlic 
Roman  Empire.— iK.  E.  P.  B.  Weigali,.  8vo,  410  pp.,  14  plates.  No  Index. 
i6s.     (Blackwood.) 

Romance  is  delightful,  and  so  is  History,  but  the  combination  of  the  two  may 
not  improve  either.  Scott  happily  labelled  his  history  as  romance  ;  but  Mr.  Weigall 
labels  his  romance  as  history,  seriously  calling  it  a  study  in  the  Origin  of  the  Roman 
ICmpire,  and  we  must  therefore  take  it  from  this  point  of  view.  Yet  the  preface 
argues  against  giving  any  of  the  evidences  on  which  a  new  reading  of  history  is 
here  presented.  If  a  writer  is  accepting  the  usual  views  and  lines  of  thought,  it  may 
not  be  needful  to  give  reasons  for  what  is  generallj-  known  ;  but  when  a  fresh  view 
is  urged,  and  colours  most  of  a  volume,  it  is  essential  to  state  all  the  grounds  for  it, 
and  not  to  refer  to  quotations  as  a  "jargon  of  scholarship"  to  be  "swept  into  the 
world's  dust-bin."  A  romance  is  a  romance,  and  its  illusion  is  ruined  by  the  horrid 
footnote,  "  This  is  a  fact."     But  a  ''study,"  which  claims  to  show  a  new  standpoint 


4-  /lev  tews. 

must  be  justified  by  facts,  and  that  justification  is  unhappily  lacking  at  the  most 
critical  points. 

\Vc  must  sympathize  with  any  endeavour  to  put  a  period  of  the  past  into  its 
vvork-a-day  terms,  and  for  such  a  purpose  enough  general  references  are  here  given 
to  enlighten  an  ordinary  reader.  For  a  popular  restoration,  to  give  a  living  sense 
of  a  period,  such  a  treatment  is  sufficient.  Taken  as  being  intended  to  make  the 
public  have  some  understanding  of  one  of  the  greatest  crises  of  the  world,  it  would 
be  a  meritorious  work,  however  some  matters  of  taste  may  jar  on  us.  But  when 
a  new  rendering  of  the  great  politics  of  the  lime  is  thrust  forward  as  a  main  subject, 
we  need  to  take  it  criticall}',  and  not  as  matter  of  light  reading.  Mysticism  in 
Religion  may  be  in  its  place,  as  that  concerns  the  individual  only,  and  may  be  the 
key  for  his  character;  but  Mysticism  in  Historj',  reading  the  author's  suppositions 
into  the  springs  of  action  of  the  past,  is  a  dangerous  process  unless  it  be  very  fully 
supported  by  plenty  of  evidence,  and  unless  the  writer  shows  also  his  care  not  to 
exceed  the  scope  of  his  material. 

The  position  of  Cleopatra  lias  been  largely  misunderstood  in  all  ages ;  in  some 
respects  Mr.  Weigall  rightfully  states  it,  but  the  most  important  legal  position  he 
ignores.  It  hardly  needs  emphasis  now,  that  the  moral  standpoint  of  our  age  is 
peculiar,  and  will  not  fit  any  other  period  of  history.  We  stand  apart  from  all  other 
times  in  making  various  professions  which  are  ignored  in  practice.  To  appl)'  our 
professions  rigorously  to  the  acts  of  the  present  majority  would  be  fatuous,  to 
apply  them  to  the  acts  of  the  i)ast  is  still  more  absurd.  But  because — partl\'  from 
political  prejudice,  partly  from  later  changes, — the  acts  of  Cleopatra  have  been 
misunderstood,  that  does  not  justify  us  in  trying  to  misplace  her  in  a  different 
direction,  proclaiming  that  because  she  was  not  Phryne  she  was  therefore  Egeria. 

The  basis  of  her  whole  status  and  actions  was  that  she  was  hereditary  queen  of 
Egypt.  The  Egyptian  throne,  like  other  property  in  that  land,  descended  by  female 
right.  In  the  earliest  times  we  find  that  kings  were  seldom,  if  ever,  the  sons  of  their 
predecessors.  The  royal  daughters  were  brought  forward  at  the  great  feast  of  the 
deification  of  the  king,  apparently  to  be  married  to  his  successor.  This  matriarchal 
.system  naturally  led  to  a  compromise  with  the  patriarchal  descent,  by  which  the 
royal  daughter  was  married  to  her  half-brother,  a  son  of  the  king  by  another  mother. 
Such  marriages  were  usual  in  the  system  of  the  early  Hebrews  and  the  classical 
Greeks,  and  even  the  full-brother  marriage  was  allowed  in  Roman  Egypt.  Through- 
out the  Ptolemaic  dynasty  the  queens  had  led  a  predominant  part ;  political  action, 
intrigue,  and  the  raising  of  armies  were  their  special  sphere,  and  only  matters  of 
trade  and  actual  fighting  seem  to  have  been  outside  of  their  management.  The 
brother  and  sister  marriages  were  the  rule  ;  and  in  the  close  of  the  d)-nast)-  the  two 
sisters  Arsinoe  and  Cleopatra  were  so  much  older  than  the  boy  brothers  that  all 
political  action  rested  with  them.  When  Arsinoe  was  once  removed,  Cleopatra 
remained  the  sole  real  ruler  of  the  land.  What  was  thus  to  happen  if  a  foreigner 
intruded  and  took  possession  of  her  rule?  When  the  Persians  conquered  l'2gj-pt, 
a  fiction  was  at  once  put  about  that  Cambyses  was  descended  from  the  daughter  of 
the  last  legitimate  king,  Apries.  When  Alexander  took  Egypt,  his  maternity  could 
not  be  falsified,  so  a  fiction  of  his  descent  from  Amen  was  framed  to  satisfy  Es^j'ptian 
ideas.  Though  the  Ptolemies  appear  to  have  kept  their  family  entirely  in  the 
Macedonian  race,  yet  three  centuries  of  occupation,  adopting  the  Egyptian  adminis- 
tration and  system,  would  put  Cleopatra  in  the  full  status  of  hercditar_\'  ruler,  and, 
through  marriage  with  her,  any  man  would  be  legally  established  as  king  of 
Egypt. 


Revieivs.  43 

The  connection  of  Cleopatra  with  the  successive  rulers  of  Egypt,  Cn.  Pompey, 
Caesar  and  Antony,  and  her  wish  to  pacify  Augustus  for  the  same  end,  was 
therefore  her  peremptory  duty  as  heiress  of  Egypt.  Such  a  poHtical  duty  was 
nothing  new  in  the  land.  The  heiress-rulers  of  the  Thebaid,  Shepenapt,  Neitaqert, 
and  Ankhnes-ra-nefer-ab,  were  all  political  consorts  of  the  kings  of  the  XXVIth 
dynasty,  even  \<ithout  being  their  co-habiting  wives.  The  political  duty  of 
a  marriage  was  quite  familiar  to  Egyptian  ideas.  The  political  position  of  itself 
produced  such  marriage. 

It  is  therefore  quite  irrelevant  to  the  private  character  of  Cleopatra  to  insist 
upon  her  having  been  married  in  the  European  sense  to  the  de  facto  ruler  of  Egypt. 
Her  public  character  was  vindicated  by  her  devotion  to  the  lord  of  Egypt,  whoever 
he  might  be  ;  she  had  done  her  duty  to  her  country  and  to  herself  as  ruler,  when 
she  took  her  place  as  spouse  of  the  conqueror,  and  bore  children  to  him.  To  have 
deserted  her  position,  and  refused  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  her  country  would  have 
been  political  infamy.  For  us  to  insist  in  calling  her  wife,  in  assuming  that  some 
ceremony  of  "a  purelj'  Egj'ptian  marriage"  took  place,  in  speaking  of  her  as  being 
"deserted  by  her  lover,"  is  to  put  her  in  the  place  of  a  western  woman  instead  of  an 
Egyptian  heiress,  to  rule  her  conduct  by  the  European  laws  of  private  life  instead 
of  by  the  Egyptian  laws  of  public  life.  The  whole  subject  of  marriage  law  in 
Egypt  appears  to  be  one  of  a  contract  concerning  property,  in  hand  or  prospective. 
Xo  religious  sanctions  or  ceremonies  are  known  to  have  accompanied  it.  Even 
under  Christianity,  and  in  the  family  of  a  priest,  a  marriage  contract  was  only 
concerned  with  the  liberty  of  action,  and  of  divorce  by  either  party  for  a  stipulated 
sum.  If  such  was  the  case  with  ordinary  private  marriage,  obviously  no  ceremonial 
was  needed  when  the  status  of  the  parties  was  already  fixed  by  the  force  of  events, 
quite  irrespective  of  any  ceremonial  marriage.  Should  we  have  had  such  glowing 
accounts  of  the  magnificence  of  Cleopatrean  banquets,  and  yet  not  a  word  of 
a  festival  which  would  have  been  the  most  important  of  all  to  western  writers,  if  it 
had  ever  taken  place  ?  There  was  no  such  marriage  ceremony,  because  it  would 
have  seemed  entirely  superfluous.  The  heiress  of  Egypt  was  at  once  de  facto  and 
dejure  the  spouse  of  the  lord  of  Egypt  by  her  position  alone.  She  did  not  desert 
Antony  at  Actium,  she  merely  followed  her  duty  as  heiress  of  Egypt  to  retreat  there 
when  the  lordship  was  to  be  changed,  and  prepare  her  land  and  herself  for  a  new 
lord.  If  added  to  her  political  situation  there  was  a  wealth  of  private  feelings  and 
a  world  of  passion,  she  was  bound  to  restrain  that  in  its  results  as  completely  as 
a  modern  princess,  who  is  condemned  to  marry  politically  and  not  as  a  private 
woman.  Any  other  view  of  tiie  western  kind  is  merelj-  misreading  the  situation 
by  not  understanding  it. 

The  personality  of  Cleopatra  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  on  record.  There 
seems  to  have  been  a  fresh  element  beside  the  regular  Ptolemaic  stock.  Her 
forefathers  for  centuries  had  never  learned  the  language  of  the  country  they  ruled, 
and  some  even  forgot  their  native  Macedonian,  and  could  only  speak  Greek. 
They  showed  no  trace  of  linguistic  faculty ;  yet  Cleopatra  could  speak  seven 
languages,  of  all  the  countries  with  which  she  had  to  deal.  The  kings  had  been 
latterly  notorious  for  gross  bulk  and  pleasures  of  the  table  ;  Cleopatra  was  lithe  and 
sprightly.  Who  was  her  mother  ?  Her  father  seems,  by  the  family  history,  to  have 
made  a  second  marriage,  but  with  whom  is  not  on  record.  Perhaps  with  some  princess 
of  Syrian  stock,  who  could  show  a  Ptolemaic  descent,  and  so  keep  up  an  hereditary 
claim  on  Egypt.  The  clue  to  the  character  of  Cleopatra  seems  to  lie  in  the  history 
of  her  unknown  mother,  and  it  is  beside  the  mark  to  term  her  a  pure  Macedonian. 


44  Reviews. 

The  characteristics  which  struck  the  public  attention  were  her  magnificence  of 
design,  shewn  with  good  taste  supported  by  profusion,  her  wit  and  fascination  of 
address,  her  wisdom  in  practical  matters,  all  blended  by  an  incalculable  versatilit)-, 
•'  she  gamed,  she  drank,  she  hunted,  she  reviewed."  There  is  but  one  comparison 
with  this  brilliance,  the  great  queen  of  Palmyra  who  harangued  her  soldiers  with 
a  helmet  on ;  with  the  severity  of  a  tyrant  when  necessity  required,  and  all  the 
clemency  of  a  good  prince ;  born  with  the  tenacity  of  a  Spaniard  ;  sober,  yet 
having  no  scruple  to  drink  with  her  officers  ;  with  a  magnificent  tabic  and  service  ; 
speaking  at  least  four  or  five  languages,  fond  of  literature  ;  having  black  eyes 
incomparably  lively  and  glittering,  a  divine  spirit,  and  most  delicate  shape  and 
presence,  with  a  clear  manly  voice,  as  Pollio  tells  us.  These  two  greatest  of  queens 
may  well  have  had  a  common  ancestry  in  some  Syrian  princess. 

Whatever  folly  attaches  to  the  history  of  Cleopatra  is  due  to  the  childishness 
of  Antony,  his  vacillation,  conceit  as  a  general,  lack  of  foresight  and  bad  manage- 
ment. The  queen  tried  to  laugh  him  out  of  his  hanging  upon  her,  but  in  vain. 
Her  sound  sense  and  good  feeling  was  shewn  in  her  care  of  her  children,  and  equal 
nurture  of  them  all.  In  every  turn  of  affairs  her  personality  was  the  main  element ; 
and  even  at  the  age  of  thirty-eight — old  for  a  Levantine  — she  bewitched  the  envoy 
of  Octavian. 

The  characters  that  have  stamped  themselves  on  the  mind  of  the  world  were 
all  marked  out  by  their  intense  vitality.  Alexander,  Julius,  Cleopatra,  Zenobia, — 
in  a  lesser  degree  Charlemagne  and  Henry  VHI, — all  were  versatile,  and  yet 
excelled  in  every  kind  of  action.  It  was  their  number  of  activities,  all  things  to  all 
men,  and  their  supremacy  in  all  directions,  which  has  justly  made  them  each  more 
important  than  a  myriad  million  of  common  mankind. 

We  may  now  look  at  the  position  of  Julius  as  regards  Egypt.  To  get  the 
riches  of  the  most  wealthy  land  around  the  Mediterranean  had  long  been  an  object 
of  his.  He  tried  to  get  appointed  to  Egypt  when  Cleopatra  was  only  four  years  old. 
Blocked  from  the  east  by  the  ambitions  of  more  powerful  men,  he  turned  to  make 
himself  a  power  by  the  conquest  of  Gaul.  For  eight  strenuous  years  he  built  up 
a  military  strength,  greater  than  that  wielded  by  any  Roman  before  ;  and  then 
returned  with  that  to  subdue  Rome  and  the  world  to  his  will.  To  suppose  that 
such  a  will,  so  tenacious,  so  ambitious,  should  after  those  long  years  of  undisputed 
power,  suddenly  find  at  the  age  of  fifty-four  a  new  scope  of  life  at  the  bidding  of 
a  young  woman,  is  too  much  for  our  author  to  require  of  us.  The  vision  of 
Cleopatra  teaching  Caesar  ambition,  and  moulding  his  politics,  is  so  improbable 
that  very  clear  facts  would  be  needed  to  support  it.  But  there  is  no  evidence 
whatever  for  the  idea  of  Caesar  crossing  to  Egypt  to  learn  his  business.  He  came 
so  soon  as  he  could,  to  grasp  the  wealth  which  he  had  tried  to  reach  seventeen 
years  before,  and  his  intended  Parthian  expedition  was  but  treading  in  the  steps 
of  Sulla  and  Crassus. 

The  position  of  his  son  Caesarion  is  obscure.  That  Julius  owned  him  is 
certain,  that  he  regarded  him  as  his  heir  is  very  doubtful.  It  seems  fairly  shewn 
by  Mr.  Weigall  that  Caesar  stayed  at  Alexandria  till  the  birth  of  Caesarion, 
whether  for  that  or  for  political  reasons  cannot  be  settled.  The  position  of 
Cleopatra  with  her  infant  son  at  Rome,  by  no  means  implies  that  Caesar  could 
have  made  her  queen  of  Rome.  It  is  doubtful  if  even  Ins  will  could  have  put 
a  foreigner  into  that  position.  A  century  later,  when  all  kinds  of  foreign  mixture 
and  looser  marriage  prevailed,  Titus  had  to  dismiss  Queen  Berenice  from  Rome 
when  he  became  Emperor,  and  could  not  invite  her  to  a  joint  throne  for  which 


) 


Reviews.  45 

there  was  no  other  legal  occupant.  That  Caesar  wished  to  legalise  his  oriental 
union  for  Egyptian  purposes  is  doubtless  true ;  the  proposal,  however,  was  not 
a  law  to  put  away  Calpurnia,  his  Roman  wife,  but  to  sanction  the  recognition  by 
Rome  of  his  having  two  wives,  one  in  Rome  and  one  in  Egypt.  For  that  end  it 
was  desirable  to  familiarise  the  Romans  with  the  fact  of  his  only  known  descendant 
being  the  son  of  Cleopatra,  and  her  stay  in  Rome  was  for  that  end.  But  it  does 
not  in  the  least  follow  that  if  Caesar  were  to  be  formally  king,  in  name  as  well  as 
fact,  that  Cleopatra  would  be  therefore  queen  of  the  whole  Roman  world,  as 
Mr.  VVeigall  assumes.  She  would  then  be  queen  of  Egypt  indefeasibly  in  Roman 
law,  but  not  more.  If  the  object  were  to  make  her  queen  of  the  Empire,  nothing 
more  was  needful  than  for  Caesar  to  have  repudiated  Calpurnia  and  taken 
Cleopatra  instead,  as  readily  as  dozens  of  other  political  divorces  and  marriages 
were  then  arranged.  That  he  did  not  do  so  is  proof  that  there  was  an  entire  bar 
to  Cleopatra  becoming  queen  of  Rome,  a  bar  in  law  or  in  the  good  sense  of  Caesar, 
who  after  all  watched  his  democracy  very  carefully. 

The  powers  that  Caesar  assumed  are  quoted  by  our  author  as  hereditary  (i  59) ; 
3-et  the  imperatorship  was  not  hereditary.  Mommscn  says:  "It  is  only  in  the 
case  of  the  supreme  priesthood  that  we  have  express  testimony  to  his  having  made 
it  hereditary."  (V,  xi.)  The  idea  that  without  Cleopatra  and  Caesarion  "  the 
creation  of  a  hereditary  monarchy  would  be  superfluous  "  (p.  168)  is  to  import  our 
ideas  into  Rome.  In  Rome,  as  in  Babylonia  and  China,  adoption  was  so 
important  a  function  in  social  and  family  life,  that  it  often  took  the  entire  place  of 
descent.  The  hereditary  laws  of  Caesar's  position  would  only  apply  in  Roman 
eyes  and  Roman  law  to  his  Roman  heir,  the  adopted  nephew  Octavian,  and  could 
never  be  applicable  to  the  son  of  a  foreigner.  To  argue  that  a  law  of  inheritance 
of  an  office  would  apply  to  Caesarion,  is  to  suppose  Rome  ruled  by  English  law. 
The  heir  was  obvious  and  well  known,  the  adopted  son  Octavian,  of  years  for 
politics,  and  not  the  foreigner's  baby  who  could  not  be  of  account  during  any 
likely  survival  of  Caesar.  No  evidence  whatever  is  given  for  the  assertion  that 
Julius  had  a  "scheme  for  training  up  Caesarion  to  follow  in  his  footsteps  "  (p.  170). 

The  next  great  possessor  of  Egypt  was  Antony ;  and  it  was  his  policy  to 
support  Caesarion,  as  a  harmless  infant,  to  balance  the  immediate  political  claims 
of  Octavian  as  Caesar's  heir.  It  is  remarkable  how  none  of  the  Julian  family  were 
succeeded  by  a  son  :  it  was  only  the  Xlth  and  then  the  XVIIIth  Emperor  who 
inherited  a  father's  throne.  Yet  Antony  was  the  ancestor  of  three  emperors,  his 
grandson  Claudius,  great-grandson  Caligula,  and  great -great-grandson  Nero. 

The  account  given  of  Octavian  is  strangely  spiteful ;  all  the  infirmities  and 
valetudinarian  habits  of  an  old  man  in  the  seventies,  as  he  was  remembered  and 
described  to  Suetonius,  are  here  attributed  to  the  youthful  conqueror  of  thirty. 
VVe  might  as  truthfully  describe  George  III  during  the  American  War  as  blind 
and  wearing  a  black  skull  cap.  Some  other  mistakes  are  surprising.  On  p.  185, 
we  read  that  Alexander  IV  was  murdered  "soon  after  his  father's  death,"  yet  he 
survived  thirteen  years.  On  p.  258,  the  daughter  of  Sextus  Pompey  is  described 
as  "  marrying  Marcellus,  the  son  of  Octavian,"  whereas  she  was  betrothed  to 
Marcellu.s,  the  infant  son  of  Octavia.  On  p.  353,  the  isthmus  of  Suez  is  described 
as  35  instead  of  over  90  miles  across.  Misprints  occur  in  Myt^lene,  Sjstra, 
Ptobmies,  and  Ant/tony,  which  have  escaped  the  proof  readers  named  in  the 
preface. 

It  would  require  more  accuracy  than  we  have  observed  to  give  us  confidence 
in  the  flow  of  assertions  which  carry  on  the  narrative.     Akhenaten  is  said  to  have 


46  Revieivs. 

been  epileptic  (p.  141)  of  which  no  evidence  is  known  ;  and  on  almost  every  page 
"  must  have  been,"  "  must  have  come,"  or  "  must  have  realised,"  do  duty  for 
connective  facts  that  arc  missing.  It  is  hard  to  forgive  the  cynical  degradation  of 
the  story  of  Arria,  of  which  Lecky  rightly  says  "  her  death  was  perhaps  the  most 
majestic  in  antiquity  "  ;  it  is  here  said  to  be  a  light  matter,  Arria  "  coolly  handed 
the  weapon  "  to  Paetus,  her  exclamation  is  wrongly  quoted  as  if  Paetus  was  going 
to  hurt  her,  and  it  is  spoilt  in  translation.  The  author  might  qualify  for  managing 
the  affairs  of  Cleopatra  as  major-domo  or  vizier  in  Amenti,  rather  than  in 
expounding  her  life  and  policy  that  is  pa.st.  Far  more  would  we  wish  to  see  the 
solid  stores  of  information  that  Mr.  Weigall  has  garnered  during  his  strenuous 
work  as  Inspector  in  Kgypt ;  more  volumes  such  as  his  on  the  monuments  of 
Nubia  would  be  most  welcome,  and  build  a  permanent  place  for  his  reputation  in 
Egyptology. 

Ritual  of  the  Mystery  of  the  Judgment  of  the  Soul.—?>y  M.  W.  BlacKDEN. 
8vo,  16  pp.,  I  plate.     5^.     (Quaritch.) 

The  confused  mass  of  documents  of  various  ages  and  sources,  which  are 
commonly  grouped  as  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  form  the  greatest  task  that  criticism 
has  yet  to  handle.  The  restoration  of  the  early  texts  is  the  first  necessity,  and  no 
one  has  yet  attempted  to  connect  the  scattered  material.  The  assigning  of  relative 
periods  to  the  various  portions  might  give  generations  of  critics  a  fighting  ground. 
Some  parts  are  of  so  plainly  a  question-and-answer  construction  that  it  is  natural 
to  suppose  they  may  have  been  actually  recited,  and  not  only  be  for  a  guide  book 
to  the  future  world.  In  this  work  Mr.  Blackden  has  boldly  re-arranged  some  parts 
so  as  to  frame  a  usable  ritual.  The  question  is  how  far  this  is  justified  :  certainly 
the  arrangement  has  no  kind  of  proof  for  its  plan  ;  how  far  does  it  justify  itself  by 
internal  evidence  ? 

The  system  of  this  arrangement  is  as  follows.  Chapter  125  is  compiled  in 
portions  from  three  sources  (Ani,  Nu,  and  Nebseni) ;  in  it  are  inserted  at  different 
places  Chapter  3015  of  Ani,  later  the  remainder  of  30B  from  Nebseni,  together  with 
part  of  the  Introduction.  At  the  end  is  the  rest  of  the  Introduction,  and  part  of 
the  First  Chapter.  Now  we  do  not  know  how  early  the  chapters  were  arranged  in 
the  order  in  which  we  number  them  ;  but  there  seems  no  evidence  that  any 
such  patchwork  as  this  was  the  original  connection  of  the  documents.  As  a 
suggestion  of  the  author's  appreciation  of  the  possibilities  of  a  ritual  arrangement  it 
may  stand  ;  but  if  we  wish  to  reach  the  historical  development  very  different  criteria 
are  required. 


(     47     ) 


NOTES    AND    NEWS. 


The  terrible  disaster  to  civilisation  is  stopping  research  in  every  direction. 
Excavations  both  Tn  Egypt  and  in  Mesopotamia  are  at  a  standstill.  Not  only 
English  but  American  work  is  arrested.  Dr.  Lythgoe  and  Mr.  Mace  are  not  trying 
to  reach  Egypt  this  winter.  Prof.  Whittemore  is  actively  supplying  necessaries  to 
the  French  Medical  Corps  at  the  front.  The  British  School  of  Archaeology,  and 
also  the  Exploration  Fund,  are  both  waiting  till  a  safer  situation  is  reached. 

Mr.  Engelbach  is  in  the  Quartermaster's  Department,  behind  the  British  lines. 

Of  our  former  workers,  Mr.  K.  T.  Frost  fell  in  action  in  the  beginning  of  the 
war;  of  course  no  details  are  known.  Mr.  Angelo  Hayter  is  now  interpreter  to  the 
camp  of  German  prisoners  of  war  at  Llansannan,  Abergele,  North  Wales. 
Mr.  North  is  in  training  in  the  East  Surrey  Regiment.  Our  other  friends  are 
continuing  in  their  training  as  reported  in  our  last  Journal. 

Recognising  that  most  of  the  subscribers  to  the  British  School  will  feel  the 
present  emergencies  to  be  the  urgent  call,  our  Committee  has  decided  to  ask  all 
the  subscribers  who  wish  to  help,  to  contribute  through  our  Hon.  Sec.  to  the  Officers' 
Families  Fund.  This  Fund,  established,  in  the  South  African  War,  has  experienced 
management,  personal  care  and  watchfulness  to  meet  all  cases,  and  no  waste  on 
offices  and  staff;  as  one  of  the  most  admirable  of  such  auxiliaries  to  our  afflicted 
people,  we  hope  it  will  have  full  support. 

Meanwhile  let  us  keep  our  Journal  going,  as  that  is  so  slight  a  cost  that  it  need 
not  impair  any  other  good  work.  The  present  number  deals  with  European 
relations  of  Egypt  specially ;  the  next  will  give  entirely  new  material  on  the 
palaeolithic  age  in  Egypt  and  its  relation  to  the  glacial  periods  in  Europe. 

THE  EGYPTIAN  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

Some  of  the  branches  are  in  full  working  order  this  winter,  and  bravely  continuing 
their  Monthly  Meetings.  Others  are  suspending  their  activities  for  the  present,  but 
perhaps  we  all  need  to  have  our  attention  turned  for  a  brief  hour  to  some  subject 
other  than  that  which  absorbs  us  all,  and  I  commenri  the  resumption  of  meetings  to 
the  branches  which  have  flagged.  Knitting  can  be  pursued  by  all  the  members 
except  the  lecturer,  so  the  meetings  need  not  mean  waste  of  time. 

London.  (Hon.  Sec,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  temp,  address,  c/o  Edwards  Library,  University 
College,  Gower  .Street,  W.C.)— Meetings,  monthly,  at  8  p.m.,  lecture,  8.30  p.m.  Oct.  29,  at 
University  College,  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie,  on  "  The  Use  of  Metals  in  Egypt."  Nov.  5  (by 
kind  invitation  of  Mrs.  Purdon),  paper  on  "The  Flint  Age  in  Egypt,"  by  Prof.  Flinders 
Petrie,  read  by  H.  F.  P.  Dec.  10  (by  kind  invitation  of  Mrs.  P.  Bigland),  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  on 
"  The  Bogomils." 

Gl.asgow.  (Hon.  Sec. /ro.  tern..  Miss  D.  Allan,  15,  Woodside  Terrace.)— Meetings,  open  to 
public,  at  University,  8.30  p.m.  Dec.  7,  Prof.  Milligan,  on  "Thousand  Years  on  the  Nile." 
Feb.  15,  Prof.  Gregory,  on  "  History  of  the  Climate  of  Egypt." 

Hastings.  (.Mrs.  Russell  .Morris,  Quarry  Hill  Lodge,  St.  Leonards.)— Major  Davenport, 
on  ".Ancient  Egyptian  Jewellery."  Dr.  Spanton,  on  "The  Egyptian  Water  Lily."  Rev.  J.  D. 
Gray,  on  "  Neolithic  Man."     .Mrs.  Court,  on  "  Sign  Language." 

Ross-ON-WVE.  (Mrs.  Marshall,  Gayton  Hall.)— Oct.  21,  3.15  p.m.  (Mrs.  Cobbold),  subject, 
.Schedule  F.  Nov.  18,  3.15  p.m.  (Mrs.  Schomberg),  subject.  Schedule  G.  A  small  lending  library 
on  Egyptian  and  Ancient  History,  free  for  members'  use,  is  established  in  Ross. 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


(    48     ) 


THE  PORTRAITS. 

Among  the  few  of  the  great  works  of  early  art  that  ha%e  survived,  the  wooden 
steles  of  Ra-hesy  are  justly  celebrated.  Some  of  them  have  been  frequently 
published,  and  can  be  easily  obtained  in  photographs.  The  one  here  given  has 
remained  practically  unknown  until  the  recent  publication  by  Mr.  Quibell  from 
which  we  copy  it.  In  the  other  steles  we  sec  a  fiercely  active  figure,  or  one  of  hard 
determination.  The  present  figure  is  apparently  older,  and  with  a  more  suave 
subtilty  about  the  expression.  How  the  early  art  could  realise  the  diplomatic 
cunning  of  age  is  familiar  to  us  in  the  primitive  king  of  Abydos,  so  astonishingly 
rendered  in  ivory.  Here  we  see  much  the  same  character,  of  refined  caution  and 
reserve,  which  would  well  befit  an  ambassador  or  an  archbishop.  The  titles  read 
in  four  vertical  columns.  Many  of  them  arc  still  unintelligible  to  us,  but  we  can 
read  of  his  being  chief  of  Huto,  prophet  of  Horus  of  Edfu  at  Buto,  leader  of  the 
march,  and  architect. 

The  second  head  is  that  of  the  small  figure  at  the  side  of  the  copper  statue  of 
Pepy  I.  Some  have  thought  that  it  represents  his  ka,  but  the  ka  was  of  the  same 
age  as  the  person  ;  this  probably  is  the  son  of  Pepy,  afterwards  king  Merenra. 
The  two  figures  were  found,  taken  to  pieces  and  packed  one  inside  another,  in 
a  pit  in  the  temple  of  Hierakonpolis.  Mr.  Quibell,  who  found  them,  states  that  the 
smaller  figure  was  in  three  pieces,  packed  inside  the  larger.  Yet  the  figures  were 
made  by  hammering  sheets  of  copper,  and  attaching  them  by  copper  nails, 
apparently  to  a  wooden  core.  If  there  were  such  a  core  it  is  difficult  to  see  how 
the  pieces  could  be  put  one  in  another  ;  and  certainly  the  metal  had  not  been 
removed  from  a  wooden  core,  or  it  would  have  been  strained  open  and  bent.  The 
rows  of  nails  at  the  junction  of  the  beaten  plates  are  evident,  and  certainly  there 
must  have  been  a  solid  mass  to  form  the  top  and  back  of  the  head,  and  the  waist 
of  the  larger  figure,  which  parts  are  not  executed  in  copper.  The  wooden  core — as 
in  the  royal  statues  in  Westminster  Abbey — seems  necessary  for  such  a  method  of 
work,  with  nailed  sheets  of  metal ;  yet  it  is  very  difficult  to  see  how  the  pieces 
could  have  been  placed  one  inside  the  other  when  the  figures  were  taken  down  and 
dismantled.  Had  the  wood  been  burnt  out,  the  condition  of  the  metal,  and  the 
white  limestone  eye  of  the  statue,  would  have  shown  the  effect  of  heat. 

What  we  must  admire  as  a  masterpiece  of  technical  and  artistic  skill  is  the 
hammering  out  of  such  a  portrait  head  in  beaten  copper.  The  life-like  vigour  of 
the  head  could  not  have  been  exceeded  in  the  most  facile  material,  and  it  shows 
that  in  metal  working,  as  in  masonry,  the  Pyramid  age  had  reached  a  perfection 
that  has  never  been  exceeded.  The  face  and  neck  are  worked  in  one  piece;  the 
hair  was  made  separately,  and  then  the  two  parts  joined.  The  head  is  closely  the 
size  of  the  photograph  here,  the  whole  figure  being  two  feet  high.  The  thickness 
of  the  metal  in  the  limbs  is  ^'jth  of  an  inch.  Though  the  hands  of  the  figures 
would  be  the  most  difficult  part  to  work  by  beating,  yet  on  examination  there  was 
no  evidence  that  they  were  cast.  The  whole  of  the  figures  was  wrought  by  the 
hammer.  As  one  of  the  supreme  pieces  of  metal  working  we  give  it  here  in  the 
history  of  the  metals  in  Egypt. 


-^ 


% 


f'lH  fci  11  'i^^- 


k 


*^'-^jit'»^-    ii;«f''"\XV^:'  ■.'f|[<Ci>- 


t 


■:;^HmM' 


WOOD. 


STELE    OF    RA-HESY.      Ilird    DYNASTY. 

SAQQAREH.  CAIRO     MUSEUM. 


fi 


BUST    OF    STATUETTE    OF    PRINCE    MERENRA.      Vlth    DYNASTY. 
COPPER.  HIERAKONPOLIS.  CAIRO    MUSEUM. 


^ 


A 


IVORY  AND   GOLD   CRETAN    STATUETTE,    BOSTON    MUSEUM. 


A 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


A   CRETAN    STATUETTE. 


We  are  enabled  by  the  kindness  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Museum,  Mr.  B.  J.  Gilman, 
to  present  to  our  readers  some  pictures  of  the  remarkable  statuette  which  is  now 
in  the  Art  Mu.seum  at  Boston,  and  was  published  in  the  Museum  Btdletin  for 
December,  19 14.  Beyond  its  presentation  to  the  Museum,  nothing  is  recorded  as 
to  its  history.     See  the  Frontispiece  and  Portraits  at  end. 

The  statuette  is  six  and  a  half  inches  high,  and  is  made  of  ivory  with  gold 
ornaments  and  details.  The  body  is  in  two  f)ieces,  the  join  partly  covered  by  the 
second  flounce  and  its  gold  band  ;  the  arms  were  also  made  in  separate  pieces ; 
the  right  arm,  and  the  portion  of  the  snake  twisted  round  it,  are  a  restoration,  as  is 
also  the  lower  part  of  the  dress  on  the  right  side. 


JU  w 


//I  "^ 

urn 


Coloured  Faience  Figure,  Knossos. 
Holding  .Snakes. 


Wooden  Figure,  Thebes. 
Holding  Snakes. 


The  resemblance  of  the  figure  to  the  famous  Snake  Goddess  and  her  votaries, 
found  by  Sir  Arthur  Evans  at  Knossos,  is  obvious  at  first  sight,  and  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  we  have  before  us  a  product  of  Cretan  art.  But  the  style  of  the 
figure,  both  in  face  and  hands,  is  extraordinary,  and  differs  in  artistic  character 

D 


50  A  Cretan  Statuette. 

from  any  representations  of  the  human  form  hitherto  found  in  Crete.  The  head, 
in  particular,  is  quite  unlike  anything  known  to  us  in  early  Aegean  or  in  classical 
art ;  it  recalls  rather  the  sculptures  of  Gothic  cathedrals  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
such  as  Rheims  and  Bamberg,  but  that  it  looks  more  modern.  Under  these 
conditions  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  so  remarkable  a  work  must  occur  at 
first  to  any  critic.  But  the  possibility  of  modern  forgery  appears  to  be  precluded 
by  the  materials  and  their  condition  ;  and  there  were  no  opportunities  for  any 
such  imitations  of  Minoan  art  between  the  destruction  of  the  palace  at  Knossos 
and  its  modern  disinterment. 

In  pose,  the  statuette  resembles  the  Snake  Goddess  of  Knossos  ;  but  this 
resemblance  only  accentuates  the  essential  difference  between  the  two.  The 
Knossian  figure  is  stiff  and  conventional ;  the  new  ivory  statuette  is  fresh  and 
full  of  life,  in  the  sway  of  the  skirt  and  the  poise  of  the  waist,  as  she  throws  back 
her  shoulders  to  balance  the  extended  snakes.  For  the  subject,  beside  the  Cretan 
goddess,  we  may  compare  the  figure,  of  uncertain  origin,  found  in  Egypt,  and 
published  in  Quibeli,  Ramesseum,  pi.  Ill,  12.  This  figure,  however,  has  no  artistic 
connection  with  the  Cretan.  The  two  Cretan  "  votaries "  brandish  their  snakes 
in  the  air. 

The  dress  is  of  the  well-known  Cretan  type.  The  flounced  skirt  resembles  that 
of  the  Knossian  "  votaries,"  except  that  each  flounce  is  brought  down  to  a  point  in 
front,  as  in  the  Mycenaean  seal-ring  and  other  intaglios.  Each  flounce  is  bordered 
with  edges  of  gold,  ornamented  with  zig-zag  or  "  figure-of-eight "  designs.  The 
gold  girdle  is  of  the  hollow  Cretan  pattern.  The  surface  is  so  much  damaged 
about  the  shoulders  that  it  is  not  easy  to  make  out  the  jacket ;  doubtless  it,  as  well 
as  the  skirt,  was  indicated  in  colour.  The  gold-bordered  ends  of  the  short  sleeves 
still  remain  ;  the  rest  of  the  jacket  was,  doubtless,  as  in  other  Cretan  figures,  of  the 
"  zouave "  or  "  eton  "  type,  leaving  the  breasts  bare,  and  fastened  down  the  front 
below  them  by  a  broad  gold  clasp.  The  nipples  are  indicated  by  gold  pins  ;  and 
there  are  holes  on  the  neck  for  the  attachment  of  a  necklace,  and  on  the  upper  part 
of  the  skirt  to  attach  gold  pendants  from  the  girdle,  or  perhaps,  as  suggested  in  the 
Bulletin,  a  gold  apron. 

The  headdress  is  remarkable  :  it  consists  of  a  high  crown,  which  rises  at  the 
front,  at  the  back,  and  on  each  side  into  a  high  curve,  pierced  near  its  apex  by 
a  round  hole.  These  holes  may  have  served  to  fasten  a  gold  ornament  or  plating  ; 
but  from  their  size  and  shape  they  suggest  a  decorative  purpose.  Round  the  edge 
of  the  hair,  above  the  forehead,  are  holes  for  the  attachment  ol  a  gold  wreath  or 
diadem,  or  possibly  of  extra  curls.  The  most  remarkable  piece  of  work  in  the 
whole  is  the  face,  with  its  life-like  expression  and  its  delicately  modelled  features. 
The  eye  is  actually  sunk  into  its  proper  depth  below  the  brow — a  method  of  treat- 
ment practically  unknown  to  ancient  art  of  any  kind  before  the  fourth  century  B.C. 
One  has  only  to  look  at  the  staring  eyes,  flush  with  the  face,  in  any  early  sculpture 
to  see  the  difference.  And  not  only  does  the  eye  recede  from  the  brow,  but  the 
lower  eyelid  is  set  in  from  the  upper,  and  the  resultant  shadowing  of  the  eye  socket 
adds  greatly  to  the  expression.  The  left  hand  also  is  beautifully  and  delicately 
modelled,  with  none  of  the  exaggeration  and  distortion  of  the  thumb  which  is 
common  in  Cretan  as  in  Mesopotamian  art.  The  snakes  held  in  the  hands  are 
bent  together  from  thin  plates  of  gold. 

The  gold  and  ivory  statuette  shows  us  for  the  first  time  a  treatment  of  the 
human  figure  in  Cretan  art  which  is  comparable  in  artistic  excellence  with  the 
admirable   studies   of  animals,  which   are   of  Cretan   or    Mycenaean  origin.      If 


A   Cretan  Statuette. 


51 


possible,  it  would  be  desirable  to  fix  the  period  of  so  remarkable  a  work  in  the 
development  of  Cretan  art.  But  here  unfortunately  the  data  fail  us  ;  so  exceptional 
a  work  does  not  easily  lend  itself  to  comparison,  and  may  be  a  freak  of  individual 
genius.  The  inferior  style  of  the  faience  figures  from  Knossos,  which  date  from 
the  first  period  of  the  later  palace,  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  later  date,  though 
they  look  like  a  "degradation  from  such  work  as  we  see  in  this  statuette.  If  it 
marks  the  high-water  mark  of  Cretan  sculpture,  it  might  be  placed  not  far  from 
the  high-water  mark  of  Cretan  pottery,  and  so  go  back  to  the  Middle  Minoan  age ; 
but  such  conjectures  must  remain  for  the  present  uncertain. 


Head  of  the  Ivory  and  Goi.u  SrAiuETTE. 
Thrice  Actual  Size. 

The  new  discovery  emphasises  more  than  ever  the  contrast  between  the  art  of 
Crete  and  that  of  historic  Hellas.  The  comparison  made  at  the  beginning  of  this 
article  was  not  altogether  fortuitous,  for  such  Cretan  work  is  really  separated  by 
a  greater  gap  from  the  classical  perfection  of  Greece  than  from  the  exuberant  but 
undisciplined  imagination  of  mediaeval  or  modern  times. 

Ernest  A.  Gardner. 


D  2 


^et^^ 


t<\E  H 


LENGTH 

CLABEI-US-OCCIPITAU 
MALE 


BREADTH 

MAXI  MUM 


(     53     ) 


SKULLS   OF   THE   XIIth   DYNASTY. 

In  the  course  of*^he  cemetery  excavations  at  Harageh  and  Lahun  last  year, 
a  large  number  of  skulls  were  found,  and  I  had  joined  the  excavating  camps  in 
order  to  carry  out  the  standard  routine  of  measurements  on  the  spot.  Many  skulls 
will  not  bear  the  risks  of  transit,  and  immediate  measurements  are  free  from  any 
subsequent  distortion,  and  therefore  the  more  satisfactory.  In  all,  there  were 
measured  26  skulls  before  the  XIIth  dynasty — too  few  to  give  results  by 
themselves;  113  male  and  132  female  skulls  of  the  XIIth  dynasty,  beside  38  of 
uncertain  sex;  16  male  and  17  female  skulls  of  the  XVIIIth-XXth  dynasties; 
20  male  and  17  female  skulls  of  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty,  besides  a  few  of  uncertain 
sex.  The  detailed  measurements  of  all  these  will  appear  in  the  volume  on 
Harageh,  by  Mr.  Engelbach,  which  we  cannot  hope  to  see  prepared  till  after  the 
war.  Meanwhile,  the  general  results  may  be  seen  in  the  curves  of  distribution  in 
the  present  account. 

The  following  are  the  measurements  taken  in  accordance  with  the  International 
agreements  for  the  unification  of  Craniometric  and  Cephalometric  measurements  : — 

1.  Length,  maximum,  antero-posterior ;  from   Broca's  glabella  to  the  point  on 

the  supra-occipital  part  of  the  occipital  bone. 

2.  Breadth,  maximum  ;  in  a  horizontal  plane  above  the  supra-mastoid  crests. 

3.  Breadth,    minimum,    frontal ;    shortest    horizontal    diameter   between    the 

temporal  crests  on  the  frontal  bone. 

4.  Bizygomatic  breadth  ;  maximum  diameter  between  the  external  aspects  of 

the  two  zygomatic  arches. 

5.  Height,   basi-bregmatic  ;   between  the  basion  (median   point  on   anterior 

margin  of  foramen  magnum),  and  bregma  (median  point  of  coronal 
suture). 

6.  Naso-basilar  diameter  ;  between  the  nasion  and  the  basion. 

7.  Alveo-basilar    diameter ;    between    the    prothion    (mid    point    of  anterior 

border  of  the  alveolar  arcade)  and  the  basion. 

8.  Naso-alveolar  diameter  ;  between  the  nasion  and  the  lowest  point  on  the 

alveolar  arcade  between  the  two  upper  median  incisor  teeth. 

9.  Naso-mental  diameter ;  between  the  nasion  and  the  lower  border  of  the 

mandible  in  the  median  plane. 

10.  Orbital  width  ;  between  the  dacryon  (point  of  confluence  of  the  sutures 

formed  between  the  lachrymal  and  frontal  bones,  and  the  nasal  process 
of  the  superior  maxilla)  and  the  outer  margin  of  the  orbital  aperture, 
where  it  is  crossed  by  a  line  drawn  from  the  dacryon  parallel  to  the 
upper  and  lower  orbital  margins. 

11.  Orbital  height ;   between  the  upper  and  lower  orbital  margins,  avoiding 

any  notches  that  may  be  present ;  maximum  vertical  diameter  perpen- 
dicular to  the  line  of  orbital  width. 

12.  Nasal  height ;  between  the  nasion,  and  below  to  the  point  in  the  median 

sagittal  plane  of  the  skull,  on  the  line  tangential  to  the  two  notches  of 
the  pyriform  aperture  of  the  nose.  When  the  margins  of  these  notches 
sink  into  grooves,  then  the  level  of  the  nasal  floor  has  been  taken. 

D  3 


54 


Skulls  of  the  XHth  Dynasty. 


ALVEOLAR    INDEX 


FACIAL    IMDEX 

(N^6-ALV/ALV-BAS) 
MALE 


FEMALE 


1 3.  Nasal  width  ;  maximum  transverse  diameter  between  the  lateral  margin 

of  the  apertura  pyriformis  nasi. 

14.  Palatine  vault,  width  ;  at  the  level  of  the  second  molar  teeth   measured 

internally. 


Skulls  of  the  Xllth  Dynasty.  55 

15.  Palatine  vanlt,  length  ;  between,  in  front,  the  point  in  a  middle  line  and 

on  a  line  tangential  to  the  posterior  surfaces  of  the  median  incisor  teeth, 
and  behind,  the  point  in  the  middle  line  and  in  a  line  tangential  to  the 
deepest  parts  of  the  notches  on  the  posterior  palatine  border. 

16.  Circumference  horizontal,  maximum  ;  measured  with  a  steel  tape. 

17.  BigonHil  breadth  ;  between  angles  of  the  jaw  on  the  external  surfaces. 

18.  Symphysial  height,  in  median   plane;  between  highest  point  of  alveolar 

border,  and  the  inferior  margin  of  the  symphysis. 

19.  Ascending  ramus,  right ;   between  lowest  part  of  notch  to  lower  margin 

of  jaw. 

Walter  Amsden. 

Unfortunately,  the  military  duties  of  Dr.  Amsden,  as  a  Medical  Officer,  have 
prevented  his  reaping  the  harvest  of  results  from  the  mass  of  about  6,000  measurements 
which  he  took  and  tabulated.  Some  brief  notes  are  therefore  added  here  to 
explain  the  three  pages  of  diagrams,  which  show  the  more  important  points.  To 
form  these  curves,  the  total  number  of  e.xamples  in  each  group  of  five  millimetres 
has  been  taken,  at  steps  of  every  millimetre,  in  accordance  with  the  .system  followed 
for  the  Tarkhan  skulls.  The  length  and  two  breadths  are  shown  as  directly 
measured  ;  but  for  the  other  dimensions,  indices  have  been  extracted,  as  the  only 
other  series  of  the  same  age — from  Dendereh — has  only  been  published  by  indices, 
and  this  is  therefore  the  only  way  to  compare  results  of  the  two  sites. 

In  all  these  diagrams  the  male  and  female  curves  are  separate.  The  full  line 
is  the  result  of  the  present  work  ;  the  letter  M  shows  the  median  point  of  that  curve. 
The  points  18  and  23  are  the  medians  of  the  groups  of  the  XVIIIth  and  XXIIIrd 
dynasties  from  the  same  district.  The  dotted  curve  is  that  of  the  Xllth  dynasty 
skulls  from  Dendereh.  The  interest  in  comparing  these  is  to  see  whether  the 
foreign  invasions  between  the  Vlth  and  Xllth  dynasties  had  left  any  distinct  mark 
on  the  more  northern  people  of  Lahun  compared  with  the  people  260  miles 
further  up  the  valley  at  Dendereh.  Some  day  we  may  hope  to  see  put  together 
a  complete  view  of  the  changes  in  the  Egyptians  in  all  periods  and  districts. 

On  comparing  results,  it  is  seen  that,  in  length,  the  Xllth  dynasty  was  the 
age  of  the  shortest  skulls,  equally  at  Riqqeh  and  Dendereh.  In  the  ist  dynasty 
they  were  even  longer  than  in  the  XVIIIth,  male  and  female  alike.  In  breadth 
there  was  very  little  difference,  the  Ist  dynasty  being  like  the  XVIIIth.  So  far 
from  any  local  influence  appearing,  the  northern  and  southern  are  alike  in  length, 
and  differ  from  all  other  periods,  in  the  north,  but  continue  nearly  the  same  at 
Dendereh  in  Roman  times.  There  is  no  trace  of  an  invading  influence  being 
greater  in  the  north  than  in  the  south.  The  Bizygomatic  breadth  similarly  shows 
the  unity  of  north  and  south,  and  differences  in  later  periods. 

In  the  Alveolar  index  the  south  (dotted)  is  more  upright  in  profile  than  the 
north,  orthognathic  south,  mesognathic  north.  The  Facial  index  (height  of  faces) 
north  and  south  agree  in  a  tall  face,  later  periods  showing  a  shorter  face.  In  the 
proportions  of  the  nose  there  is  no  notable  variation.  The  eye  also  is  alike  in 
north  and  south,  but  in  later  times  the  men's  eyes  became  longer  and  the  women's 
eyes  rounder.  Altogether  the  evidence  is  that  the  Egyptian  people  were  unified 
in  Middle  and  Upper  Egypt  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  age,  but  they  were  clearly 
different  in  both  earlier  and  later  periods. 

W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 
D  4 


56 


Skulls  of  the  Xllth  Dynasty. 


•  N 


V"\  ORBITAL   INDEX 

^.  MALE 


FEfAALE 


(     57     ) 


ALEXANDRIAN    ARCHAEOLOGY. 

Dr.  Breccia,  the  Director  of  the  Alexandria  Museum,  has  issued  his  report  of  the 
antiquities  added  to  its  collections  during  191 3.  This  year  was  a  special  one 
because,  with  the  object  of  augmenting  the  relics  of  Graeco-Roman  times,  illustrating 
the  most  flourishing  period  of  Alexandria's  prosperity,  the  municipality  defrayed 
the  cost  of  excavations  upon  the  site  of  the  ancient  town  of  Theadelphia,  in  the 
Fayoum.  This  place  was  selected  because,  in  19 12,  the  fellahin  had  there 
disinterred  the  doorway  and  pylons  of  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  Crocodile-god 
Pnepheros.  This  was  evidently  the  edifice  for  which  a  long  Greek  inscription, 
published  by  M.  Lefebvre  in  1908,  set  forth  the  grant  to  it  of  the  privilege  of 
Asylum. 

The  temple  was  buried  beneath  great  accumulations  of  sand,  and  was  of 
considerable  size,  but  Dr.  Breccia  has  completely  uncovered  it,  and  in  so  doing 
made  some  remarkable  discoveries.  It  was  constructed  of  crude  bricks  and 
limestone,  and  oriented  to  the  north. 

Upon  a  large  stone  above  the  entrance  doorway  an  important  inscription, 
dated  in  the  thirty-fourth  year  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  i.e.,  1 2,7  B.C.,  stated  that  the 
pylons  and  stone  vestibule  had  been  dedicated  to  the  deity  Pnepheros,  in  honour 
of  King  Ptolemy  and  his  consort  Cleopatra  and  their  children,  by  a  certain 
Agathodorus  of  Alexandria  and  his  wife  Isidora. 

Two  crouching  lions,  sculptured  each  from  a  single  block,  guarded  the  entrance 
which  led  into  a  large  court,  having  many  doorways  at  the  sides  leading  into 
various  chambers.  In  several  places  in  the  walls  were  rectangular  niches,  and  in 
these  had  been  painted  frescoes,  almost  all  destroyed.  One,  however,  shows 
a  procession  of  Pnepheros.  He  appears  as  a  mummified  crocodile,  wearing  a  crown 
on  his  head,  and  is  placed  on  a  sort  of  barrow,  or  litter.  The  priests  march 
between  others  bearing  palms  and  flowers,  and  some  walk  in  front  of  the  bearers. 

The  first  court  has  an  exit  into  a  smaller  one,  and  on  each  side  of  this  are 
stone  sphinxes.  Upon  one  side  is  a  column,  still  showing  the  brackets  for 
supporting  torches,  to  illuminate  functions  held  at  night.  This  column  bears  an 
interesting  inscription  stating  that  it  was  erected  in  honour  of  Ptolemy  (X)  and 
Cleopatra  (III)  by  the  guild  of  the  Chenoboskoi,  or  breeders  of  the  waterfowl, 
which  doubtless  abounded  in  Lake  Moeris  and  the  many  canals  then  existing  in 
the  Fayoum.  Another  pylon  gives  access  to  a  still  smaller  court,  and  in  it 
fortunately  was  found  the  litter  for  carrying  the  deity.  It  was  in  perfect  preserva- 
tion ;  also  the  platform  in  sculptured  wood  used  for  its  stand,  and  a  fine  crocodile 
mummy.  Upon  one  of  the  pylons,  which  had  been  covered  with  stucco,  a  scene 
is  painted  depicting  a  military  officer  standing  beside  his  charger.  He  is 
represented  with  the  full  army  equipment  of  a  warrior,  wearing  a  cuirass,  with 
Gorgoneion  ornament,  and  a  rich  mantle.  One  hand  holds  a  spear,  and  the  other 
reaches  forward  to  offer  incense  towards  a  small  altar.  The  head  bears  a  crown, 
and  above  his  horse  a  winged  Victory  flies,  as  if  to  present  another  coronet  to  the 
soldier.     A   most  valuable  detail  is  that  the  head  is  surrounded  by  a  radiated 


S8  Alexandrian  Archaeology. 

nimbus,  identical  with  those  depicted  around  the  heads  of  apostles  and  saints  by 
primitive  Christian  artists.  This  discovery  tends  to  show  that  the  origin  of  this 
symbol,  like  many  others  of  early  Christian  iconography,  may  be  traced  to  Egypt. 
Beside  the  warrior  is  a  text  giving  his  name — Hero  Sonbattos. 

Upon  the  other  pylon  a  mounted  soldier  is  painted,  but  the  figure  is  much 
damaged  ;  he  also  has  the  same  style  of  nimbus,  a  tree  with  a  serpent  coiled 
around  it  is  visible,  and  a  marching  soldier  bearing  an  ensign,  like  a  double  axe. 
Beside  him  appears  a  mummified  crocodile  ornamented  with  the  insignia  of 
Pnepheros. 

From  the  third  court  Dr.  Breccia  made  his  way  into  the  deity's  chapel.  The 
walls  of  wood  and  brick  had  been  decorated  with  figures  of  human  bodies  with 
animals'  heads.  Another  room  was  almost  filled  by  an  altar,  which  has  been 
removed  to  Alexandria.  The  description  of  it  is  too  long  for  repetition  here,  and 
awaits  the  assistance  of  a  photographic  representation.  It  will  be  a  most  important 
relic  for  illustrating  the  pagan  cult  of  Pnepheros  as  carried  on  from  about  140  B.C. 
to  A.D.  170,  the  period  for  which  inscriptions  vouch  for  the  continuance  of  worship 
at  this  temple  at  Theadelphia. 

Turned  face  downwards  among  the  ruins  of  a  neighbouring  house,  Dr.  Breccia 
found  a  Greek  inscription  of  as  many  as  fifty-three  lines.  It  is  dated  in  the 
twelfth  year  of  Ptolemy  XIII,  Neos  Dionysus,  and  his  queen,  Cleopatra  Tryphena, 
about  69  B.C.  It  contains  a  decree  awarding  the  right  of  Asylum  to  the  temples 
of  Hercules  and  of  Isis  at  Theadelphia.  Its  utilisation  for  the  floor  of  a  house 
precludes  the  hope  that  its  resting  place  is  the  site  of  either  of  the  shrines  its  text 
concerns,  but  no  doubt  proper  search  would  succeed  in  finding  them  at  Theadelphia. 

This  inscription,  with  the  exception  of  the  longer  Greek  versions  of  the 
trilingual  records  of  the  Rosetta  Stone,  and  Decree  of  Canopus,  is  probably  the 
longest  Greek  text  yet  found  in  Egypt. 

The  report  gives  a  summary  of  discoveries  at  Alexandria,  chiefly  those  at  the 
long  three-galleried  catacombs  found  in  19 12  near  the  Ras  et-Tin  Palace.  The 
mummies  therein  were  much  deteriorated  by  moisture,  but  many  of  the  face  and 
breast  masks,  with  most  interesting  decorations,  have  been  rescued  from  further 
destruction.     The  burials  date  from  the  commencement  of  our  era. 

Joseph  Offord. 


(  59  ) 


THE  STONE  AGE  L\  EGYPT. 


Various  isolated  papers  have  appeared  from  time  to  time  dealing  with  wrought 
flints  found  in  Egypt  at  one  locality  or  another,  without  placing  the  material  in 
direct  connection  with  that  of  other  periods  or  other  countries.  It  seems  time  now 
to  attempt  some  co-ordination,  as  lately  the  subject  has  been  hindered  by  our  not 
being  able  to  recognise  what  is  critical  and  needing  observation  among  the  vast 
quantity  of  material  available.  We  cannot  attempt  in  a  journal  to  deal  exhaustively 
with  even  one  branch  of  the  subject ;  our  object  rather  must  be  to  give  an  outline 
showing  the  relation  of  the  various  parts,  and  dealing  only  with  obvious  types. 
For  a  full  and  definitive  study  of  any  of  the  periods,  the  first  requisite  is  a  regular 
search  for  evidence  at  first  hand  in  Egypt.  That  has  never  been  undertaken, 
except  for  a  few  weeks  of  surface  collecting  by  Mr.  Montague  Porch,  in  which  I 
specially  requested  him  to  record  the  level  (by  aneroid  over  the  Nile  plain)  and  the 
locality  of  every  specimen.  Stratigraphical 
search  in  the  gravels  is  urgently  needed  to 
obtain  material  connected  with  the  physical 
changes  of  the  country. 

Here  we  shall  only  notice  the  most 
definite  types,  especially  those  related  to  the 
European  types.  There  are  also  a  great 
number  of  irregular  forms,  which  might  be 
grouped  into  classes ;  but  it  would  be  much 
more  satisfactory  to  do  that  after  some  col- 
lecting has  been  done  from  definite  horizons 
of  the  gravels.  The  material  here  dealt  with 
is  that  which  I  have  collected  at  University 
College;  after  weeding  out  duplicates,  that 
comprises  about  300  selected  palaeoliths,  300 
Solutrean  from  the  Fayum  (chosen  from 
many  thousands),  100  from  early  settlements, 
and  300  from  the  prehistoric  graves  with 
relative  dating. 

Flint  working — like  each  of  the  arts — 
began  with  archaic  ages  which  blossomed 
into  the  grand  style  of  the  magnificent, 
massive,  symmetrical  forms  of  the  Chellean 

(Fig.  ioa)  and  Acheulean  periods.^     Nothing  made  since  has  ever  equalled   the 
satisfying  magnificence  of  these   types,  with   their  bold   large  flaking,  producing 


IOA     Early  Chei.lean  Pick. 


'  As  this  article  is  intended  for  readers  not  familiar  with  recent  geology,  the  series  of  terms 
for  periods  of  work  are  here  added.  Early,  Mesvinian,  Strepyan,  Chellean,  Acheulean,  Mousterian, 
Aurignacian,  Solutrean,  Magdalenian,  Late. 


6o  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

real  works  of  art.  The  miserable  poverty  and  rudeness  of  the  Mousterian  and 
Aurignacian  ages  reflect  the  overthrow  which  European  man  suffered  in  the  third 
Glacial  period,  when  life  was  a  struggle  in  chilly  islands  isolated  by  high  sea  levels. 
The  only  later  age  of  supreme  work  is  that  bordering  on  the  use  of  metals,  when 
the  mechanical  art  of  ripple-flaking  rose  to  its  highest  perfection  in  Egypt  and  in 
Denmark.  But — marvellous  as  that  was — it  never  reached  the  supreme  quality  of 
the  early  work  in  producing  perfect  forms  by  large  handling,  like  a  detailed  picture 
produced  by  the  skilful  use  of  a  large  brush. 

A  broad  distinction  must  always  be  observed  between  the  characteristics 
produced  by  mere  necessity,  and  those  due  to  aesthetic  feeling — the  utility  types 
and  the  artistic  types.  Though  they  merge  together,  yet  they  need  to  be 
distinguished  as  far  as  possible,  because  they  separate  between  forms  which  may  be 
expected  to  recur,  and  types  which  may  be  expected  to  be  distinctive  of  a  period. 
Mere  necessity  will  produce  similar  results  in  many  cases  ;  the  Mousterian  and 
Aurignacian  edge-chipping,  for  instance,  is  much  of  it  like  that  produced  by  a 
habit  of  scraping  different  materials.  On  now  using  old  flakes  with  clean  edges  to 
scrape  bone,  leather,  hard  wood,  pottery,  etc.,  chipped  edges  are  produced  exactly  like 
many  ancient  examples.  Such  an  edge  may  be  distinctive  of  date  in  one  country, 
because  certain  materials  may  have  been  usual  at  one  period.  But  such  details  are 
useless  in  comparison  between  countries,  as  materials  may  be  usual  in  one  land  at 
one  time,  in  another  land  at  another  time.  So  in  Egypt  this  utility  form  of  chipping 
occurs  commonly  in  the  prehistoric  graves  which  are  certainly  after  the  Solutrean 
period. 

The  case  is  quite  different  when  we  touch  on  artistic  taste.  The  fine  regular 
forms  do  not  recur  in  different  ages  of  any  one  country ;  and  there  was  nothing  to 
lead  man  to  re-adopt  particular  curves  or  styles  which  were  no  better  than  others 
for  any  practical  purpose.  In  these  cases  we  must  give  credit  to  style  as  a  prime 
indication,  to  be  accepted  unless  contradicted  by  definite  evidence  of  stratification, 
or  association  with  organisms.  There  might  be  a  hesitation  about  types  being  the 
same  in  lands  so  far  apart.  But  if  we  grant  that  a  style  might  travel  from  hand  to 
hand  five  miles  in  a  year,  it  may  travel  all  over  a  continent  in  a  thousand  years  ; 
and  that  is  a  mere  fraction  of  the  extent  of  period  of  any  of  the  great  styles  of 
stone  working. 

For  comparison  with  European  types,  the  examples  are  here  taken  from  the 
illustrations  of  the  Mus^e  Prehistorique,  1 88 1,  drawn  by  Prof  Adrien  de  Mortillet, 
whom  I  have  to  thank  for  most  cordially  allowing  the  use  of  them  here.  References 
are  given  with  the  letter  M.,  and  the  number  of  the  illustration.  Other  figures  are 
from  Die  Diluviale  Vorzeit  Detitschlands,  by  R.  R.  Schmidt,  191 2.  For  the  use  of 
these  I  could  not  ask  the  author's  permission,  owing  to  the  present  war ;  but  as  in 
the  most  original  and  important  part  of  his  work,  there  is  the  statement  that 
reproduction  or  extracts  are  only  permitted  with  statement  of  the  source,  it  is 
hoped  that  with  this  acknowledgment  the  use  of  some  twenty  figures  here  for 
purpose  of  comparison,  may  not  be  thought  objectionable.  References  are  given 
with  the  letter  S.  and  Fig.  for  text  blocks,  Roman  numerals  for  plates.  The 
specially  German  material  of  Schmidt  is  less  comparable  with  Egyptian  forms  than 
is  the  French  material  given  by  him  and  Mortillet.  The  German  types  are 
generally  much  less  finished,  and  the  great  Chellean  stage  so  largely  developed  in 
Egypt  does  not  appear  at  all  in  Central  Europe.  All  objects  and  book  illustrations 
here  are  reduced  uniformly  to  half  the  size  of  the  actual  objects,  excepting  Nos.  21, 
23  and  25,  which  are  slightly  more  reduced. 


1-3    Mesvinian?      4,5    Strepyan  ?      8,9    Early  Chellean. 


62  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

In  studying  this  subject  we  must  first  place  the  Egyptian  examples  side  by 
side  with  the  European,  to  see  the  similarity  of  form.  Then,  if  no  other  facts 
disagree,  we  cannot  do  otherwise  than  assign  the  types  in  Egypt  to  the  same 
general  period  as  those  types  in  Europe.  This  will  give  a  provisional  classification 
of  most  of  the  Egyptian  examples,  and  a  basis  for  future  study  to  confirm  or 
disprove  the  history  thus  suggested.  Further  may  be  stated  here  the  evidences  for 
alterations  of  sea  level  in  Egypt,  the  possible  relations  to  similar  changes  of  level 
in  Palestine,  at  Gibraltar,  and  in  the  west  of  Europe,  and  the  implied  connection  of 
types  of  flint  work  with  those  changes  in  Egypt.  Thus  there  will  be  a  definite 
ground  for  future  research  in  Egypt,  showing  what  are  the  critical  observations 
needed  to  define  the  facts  more  certainly.  It  is  impossible  to  advance  any 
subject  without  knowing  whether  each  detail  is  merely  a  useless  repetition  of 
what  is  well  known,  or  is  valuable  as  a  contradiction  or  corroboration  of  what  is 
supposed. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  conditions  in  Egypt  are  very  different 
from  those  in  any  European  ground.  The  flints  lost  on  the  surface  lie  on  the 
rocky  desert  plateau  as  they  fell,  not  covered  by  any  bed  of  humus.  Whatever 
soil  may  have  there  supported  vegetation  during  less  dry  periods  has  been 
completely  denuded  away  by  the  arid  blast.  Hitherto  this  denuded  plateau  has 
been  almost  the  only  gathering  ground  for  worked  flints  ;  very  few  sections  have 
been  searched,  and  none  of  the  gravels  have  been  dug  through  and  the  material 
examined. 

Figs.  1-3. — The  first  three  illustrations  show  a  class  of  flint  of  the  rudest  type  ; 
naturally  thin  worn  pebbles,  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  thick,  have  been  selected,  and 
trimmed  by  striking  flakes  off  from  each  edge,  so  leaving  a  jagged,  wavy,  cutting 
edge.  So  rude  are  these  that  they  might  belong  to  any  age  of  degradation ;  and 
as  they  are  all  found  about  twenty  feet  over  the  plain  on  the  low  ground  at  Lahun, 
their  source  proves  nothing.  Fig.  i  is  much  water-worn,  showing  that  it  is  older 
than  the  last  high-water  age,  or  pre-Aurignacian.  Figs.  2  and  3  are  quite  sharp, 
but  that  need  only  imply  that  they  were  buried  until  recent  times.  As  the  style 
most  nearly  resembles  the  Mesvinian  of  Rutot  {see  S.,  Figs.  35,  37),  these  may 
provisionally  be  assigned  to  that  late  eolithic  age. 

Figs.  5,  6,  7,  are  from  a  bed  of  gravel  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  at  Naqadeh, 
found  undisturbed  at  2,  3  and  5  feet  down,  respectively.  This  gravel  is  about 
20  feet  above  the  present  Nile  plain  ;  and  as  the  bed  of  the  Nile  has  risen  some 
20  or  30  feet  by  deposits  in  civilised  ages,  this  bed  of  gravel  cannot  be  later  than 
the  high  water  of  pre-Aurignacian  times.  The  type  of  5  is  not  unlike  4,  which 
is  the  Strepyan  type  of  Rutot  (S.,  39) ;  a  natural  thin  pebble  chipped  to 
a  moderately  even  edge.  But  the  amount  of  regularity  of  6,  and  the  long  flakes 
of  7,  show  that  the  gravel  is  probably  Mousterian  ;  and  No.  5  may  be  an  older 
work,  re-deposited  in  later  times. 

Fig.  9  is  a  partially  formed  implement  of  the  Chellean  type,  the  butt  end 
being  left  in  the  natural  pebble  condition  ;  it  is  closely  parallel  to  European  types, 
such  as  one  from  Toulouse,  Fig.  8  (M.,  42).  This  borders  on  the  pre-Chellean  type 
(as  S.,  Fig  22),  akin  to  Fig  5  above,  in  which  the  rounded  natural  surface  is  left 
where  an  edge  is  not  needed.  It  seems  as  if  this  would  be  far  more  convenient  to 
hold  than  an  entirely  chipped  surface ;  it  is  therefore  a  question  whether  the 
chipping  of  the  butt,  as  in  the  succeeding  types,  is  not  due  to  an  artistic  feeling, 
like  that  of  later  times  when  smooth-ground  blades  were  subsequently  ripple-flaked 
solely  for  the  sake  of  appearance.     It  may  be  that  the  all-chipped  butts  are  the 


.^^«^"vi:" 


10-14      M'D  ClIELLKAN. 


64  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

earliest  known  sacrifice  of  convenience  to  appearance.  The  example  9  is  of  brown 
flint,  quite  fresh  and  unaltered,  without  the  slightest  rounding.  It  was  found  at 
Nile  level  in  the  mouth  of  a  small  valley  near  El-Amrah,  and  must  have  been 
buried  until  recent  times. 

The  regular  types  of  Chellean  work  are  given  in  11  and  13  (S.,  Figs.  25,  24), 
comparable  with  10,  12,  14  from  Egypt.  These  are  boldly  worked  with  large 
flaking,  which  is  exactly  chosen  so  as  to  need  but  little  chipping  or  trimming. 
No.  10  was  found  at  Erment  at  210  metres  over  plain,  or  about  940  feet  above 
present  sea  level.  No.  12  lay  on  a  spur  of  the  cliff  between  Dendereh  and 
Naqadeh,  800  feet  over  plain,  or  1,030  feet  above  sea.  No.  14  was  found  by 
Mr.  Seton-Karr  at  a  low  level,  at  El-Ga'areh,  S.E.  of  Dendereh.  The  two  above 
have  the  dark  brown  colouring  of  the  plateau  ;  the  lower  is  a  honey  flint  partly 
whitened.  Similar  types  to  the  last  were  found,  much  water  worn  at  a  low  level 
north  of  Naqadeh,  and  quite  white  and  porous  at  Thebes. 

The  early  Acheulean  style,  15,  17,  19  (back  of  17),  is  coarser,  and  seems  to 
show  a  decay  of  the  previous  style  (S.,  Fig.  29,  xxvii,  i).  It  is  closely  paralleled 
by  16,  18  and  20.  No.  16  is  from  the  Valley  of  the  King's  Tombs  at  Thebes,  at 
240  metres  over  the  plain,  or  1,040  feet  above  sea.  It  is  moderately  water  worn, 
showing  that  the  sea  has  been  above  that  level  since  it  was  made.  The  other 
examples,  18,  20,  are  from  a  class  of  similarly  rude  work,  some  partly  water 
worn,  which  have  been  found  in  various  low  levels  between  Abydos  and  Thebes. 
They  are  not  very  distinctive ;  but  their  rolled  condition  shows  that  they 
are  pre-Aurignacian,  and  they  do  not  agree  to  any  of  the  well-developed  types, 
so  it  is  most  likely  that  they  should  go  with  the  similar  early  Acheulean  of 
Europe. 

The  regular  Acheulean  types  of  the  massive  ovoid  21,  the  pick  with  very 
large  coarse  flaking  23,  and  the  badly  dressed  pick  25,  are  all  paralleled  in  Egypt. 
These  three  types  are  assigned  to  the  early  middle  and  late  Acheulean  respectively 
(S.,  Figs.  27,  30,  32).  Other  authorities  would  space  them  further  apart,  putting 
22  as  late  Chellean,  and  25  as  early  Mousterian,  and  also  put  back  22  and  24  into 
the  Chellean  age.  These  figures  are  a  tenth  smaller  than  all  the  rest  here,  being 
I  :  22  instead  of  l  :  2.  The  heavy  ovoid  22  is  from  Erment,  at  200  metres  over 
plain,  or  900  feet  over  sea ;  and  a  larger  and  thicker  one  is  from  the  Valley 
of  the  King's  Tombs  at  Thebes.  No.  24,  from  the  low  plain,  5  miles  north  of 
Naqadeh,  is  much  water  worn,  yet  it  shows  the  very  coarse  large  flaking  like  the 
European.  No.  26  is  feebly  worked  with  poor  flaking ;  it  comes  from  a  low  level 
at  Dendereh. 

A  very  marked  form  of  Acheulean  period  is  the  narrow  pick  27  (M.,  27) ;  and 
this  is  even  more  marked  in  two  Egyptian  examples,  28  and  29,  which  have  been 
discoloured  in  gravels,  but  not  perceptibly  water  worn.  The  purpose  of  these 
was  probably  the  same  as  that  of  the  other  great  palaeoliths,  for  breaking  up  the 
soil  in  search  of  edible  roots.  Such  is  the  only  kind  of  work  suited  for  the  pointed 
pick  (otherwise  called  "  hand-axe,"  coup-de-poing,  or  faustel) ;  and  this  narrower 
pick  would  be  fit  for  a  harder,  more  clayey,  soil.  The  earliest  great  picks,  like 
crowbars  of  flint,  from  the  base  of  the  Crag,  would  be  exactly  suited  to  earth- 
smashing  ;  and  the  only  position  in  which  the  hands  can  well  grasp  them  is  with 
the  point  toward  the  holder.  To  use  the  ordinary  pick  (hand-axe)  for  cutting 
wood  is  almost  impossible ;  the  edge  would  neither  slice  nor  saw  wood,  and  the 
pointed  form  would  never  allow  of  striking  a  blow  at  a  branch,  and  cutting  like 
an  axe  or  adze.     Fig.  30  we  shall  notice  with  the  next  page. 


15-20    Early  Acheulean. 


23 


21,  22    Early—,    23,  24    Mid—,    25,  26    Latb  Acheulean. 


27-29     ACHEUI.EAN.        30     HOOF.        3I,  32     LUNATE.        33,  34     DiSC   FLINTS. 


E   2 


68 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


31  and  32  are  two  lunate  forms  that  are  certainly  early,  from  their  condition. 
31  is  from  the  Valley  of  King's  Tombs  at  230  metres,  or  1,000  feet  over  sea;  it  is 
deeply  stained  dark  brown  by  exposure.  32  is  of  a  beautiful  fawn-coloured  flint 
on  the  flat  under  side ;  on  the  upper  side  stained  a  deep  brown,  e.xcept  where  the 
white  crust  remains.  These  seem  as  if  intended  for  scraping  over  wide  curves,  as 
in  removing  bark  from  trees.  Narrower  scrapers  of  well-defined  form  are  found 
also  of  early  period,  as  these  (32  A,  B)  from  Erment,  found  at  200  metres,  or 
900  feet  over  sea.  They  are  stained  a  very  deep  brown  by  exposure.  Their  curves 
would  be  suited  for  scraping  poles  of  3  or  4  inches  thickness. 

33  and  34  are  examples  of  a  type  which  is  commoner  in  Egypt  than  in 
Europe,  where  it  belongs  to  late  Acheulean  times  ;  it  is  also  very  usual  in  South 

Africa,  together  with  the  flakes  (as 
35.  37.  39).  the  thin  flat  Chellean 
forms,  and  the  small  thick  oval 
flints  (54,  55),  all  of  which  are 
recognised  by  Mr.  Mennell  as 
being  common  in  Africa.  These 
disc  flints  in  the  best  formed 
examples  are  equally  sharp  all 
round,  and  convex  on  both  faces. 
It  seems  likely  that  they  were 
used  for  hurling  at  animals,  a 
purpose  which  may  probably  be 
the  origin  of  the  Greek  diskos 
and  modern  quoits.  They  are 
found  1,500  feet  up  at  Thebes 
(i^o-  33).  and  at  various  sites 
northward  to  Abydos. 

The  largest  class  of  Egyptian 
flints  is  that  of  the  flakes,  as  35, 
IJ,  39,  which  are  found  in  great 
quantities  on  the  high  plateau. 
Another  considerable  class  is  that 
of  the  thick  domed  flints,  as  30 
and  45,  which  are  usually  deeper 
than  half  of  the  breadth.  This 
type  is  called  by  the  Egyptians 
dufr  el-homar,  "'  donkey's  hoof," 
and  may  well  be  termed  the  hoof  type.  No  connection  had  been  observed  between 
the  hoofs  and  the  flakes  until  Mr.  Reginald  Smith  showed  me  the  Northfleet 
flints — large  blocks  trimmed  around,  in  order  to  strike  off  a  thin  sharp-edged 
implement  from  the  flat  side.  On  examining  the  hoofs  this  did  not  seem  at  first 
to  be  a  parallel  case,  as  they  do  not  show  a  single  wide  flake  face.  But  on 
comparing  the  flakes  with  the  hoofs  the  connection  became  evident.  No.  36  is  the 
flat  side  of  a  hoof  (Thebes),  37  is  a  flake  (Naqadeh)  which  is  closely  alike  in  form  ; 
on  superposing  them,  in  38,  it  is  seen  how  nearly  the  planes  of  the  flake  lie  in  line 
with  the  planes  of  the  hoof.  Similarly  on  placing  flakes  upon  the  largest  flat  face 
of  the  hoof  in  Nos.  40,  41,  42,  it  will  be  seen  that — though  none  really  belong — the 
character  of  the  planes  on  the  flakes  closely  agree  with  the  planes  on  the  hoofs. 
The  long  narrow  end  to  flake  39  is  seen  to  be  exactly  what  must  have  come  off" 


32  A,  1!,  Concave  Scrapers. 


35~45    Hoof  Flints  and  Flakes  struck  vrom  them. 


E    3 


70 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


48 


m 


50 


46,47   Late  AcHEULEAN.      48,49    Early— ;  50,  51   Mid  Mousterian. 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt.  7 1 

hoof  40.  No.  45  is  a  very  deep  hoof,  the  thickness  of  which  is  two-thirds  of  the 
width.  Flints  of  similar  character  are  found  of  the  Aurignacian  period  in  Europe, 
compare  30  with  43  and  44  (S.,  xx.xiii,  9,  10) ;  but  they  are  much  smaller  and 
used  for  scrapers,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  figures,  reduced  to  the  same  scale  of 
one-half  the  ofcject.  The  deep  staining  on  the  flakes  and  hoofs  shows  that  they 
cannot  be  dated  as  late  as  Aurignacian  times,  and  the  system  may  perhaps  be  of 
the  same  age  as  the  Northfleet  blocks,  mid  or  late  Mousterian.  The  sites  of  the 
examples  here  are  from  Thebes  to  Abydos,  and  the  flake  of  41  as  far  north  as 
Sohag.  Most  of  the  flakes  come  from  the  high  plateau  800  to  1,400  feet  up 
(1,000-1,600  feet  over  sea)  ;  the  blocks  have  often  been  found  at  lower  levels. 

The  next  European  examples  are,  46  late  Acheulean  to  Mousterian,  48  early 
Mousterian,  50  mid  Mousterian.  These  forms  are  pretty  closely  equal  to  the 
Egyptian  form  placed  opposite  to  each.  No.  47  has  a  single-face  back  struck  with 
one  blow,  as  also  is  the  parallel  46.  It  was  found  on  the  low  desert  8  miles  south 
of  Semaineh.  No.  49  is  a  pale  fawn  surface  flint,  found  4  miles  south  of  Marashdeh. 
No.  5 1  is  light  brown,  of  a  type  found  on  either  side  of  Dendereh.  The  much 
lesser  amount  of  brown  coating  on  49  and  5 1  seems  to  mark  a  more  recent  age 
than  the  Chellean  and  Acheulean,  which  are  dark  brown  in  general,  if  they  have 
been  exposed.  None  of  the  following  flints  have  more  than  a  pale  brown  or  fawn 
colour,  only  about  a  tenth  of  the  depth  of  the  coat  on  the  early  palaeoliths. 

A  large  class  of  flints  are  the  ovoids,  as  Nos.  53-55.  These  are  found  in 
a  settlement  at  Naqadeh  on  the  desert  slope  about  30  feet  over  the  Nile ;  the  site 
is  marked  by  a  hollow  sound  on  walking  over  it,  due  to  the  large  proportion  of 
ashes  in  the  ground.  At  the  time  when  these  were  found  it  was  supposed  that 
they  belonged  to  the  same  people  as  were  buried  in  the  adjacent  cemetery  of  the 
prehistoric  Egyptian  civilisation.  It  was  noticed  at  the  time  that  this  type  was 
never  found  in  the  graves,  nor  were  the  types  in  the  graves  ever  found  in  the 
settlement,  but  only  some  scraps  of  the  grave  pottery.  As  since  then  thousands 
of  prehistoric  graves  have  been  recorded,  and  never  any  of  these  flints  in  them,  it 
is  evident  that  they  belong  to  some  period  before  the  age  of  the  cemeteries,  that  is 
to  say,  before  about  8000  B.C.  Yet  the  settlement  was  formed  since  the  cessation 
of  rainfall  and  retreat  of  the  water  level ;  for  had  it  been  long  submerged  it  would 
have  become  solidified  and  not  have  had  loose,  dusty,  resounding  soil.  The  type 
is  paralleled  by  a  .Spanish  flint  from  Calvados,  52  (M.,  419),  which  does  not  seem 
to  be  dated,  but  it  most  suggests  the  early  Aurignacian  age.  There  is  no  proof 
that  the  retreat  of  the  water  level  might  not  have  been,  say,  50,000  years  ago,  and 
the  settlement  of  that  age,  perhaps  contemporary  with  the  European  Aurignacian  ; 
but  I  should  not  expect  it  to  be  of  half  that  age.  The  form  is  so  unhandy  for 
nearly  all  purposes,  that  it  is  hardly  likely  to  be  invented  in  very  difterent  times. 

Cores  have  been  formed  in  all  ages  when  flakes  were  required,  and  have 
therefore  a  wide  range  in  all  the  later  periods.  Examples  of  French  forms  are 
given  here  in  56,  57,  58  (from  Landes  and  Pontleroy,  M.,  252,  246,  247),  and  such 
are  also  known  in  Egypt.  The  thick  prismatic  core,  flaked  on  all  sides.  Fig.  59,  was 
found  at  Quft.  Oblique  cores,  as  60,  are  specially  Egyptian  :  this  example  is  from 
Thebes,  about  60  feet  over  plain.  61  is  partly  oblique,  from  a  prehistoric  grave; 
a  similar  core  was  found  at  Sohag,  600  feet  over  plain.  From  their  forms  they 
might  be  supposed  to  be  Magdalenian,  but  60  is  considerably  browned  with  age. 
Another  type  of  core  is  acutely  underhung,  Nos.  65-67,  the  flaking  planes  being 
at  only  half  a  right  angle  to  the  striking  plane.  This  angle  is  seen  in  the  late 
Aurignacian  scrapers  in  Europe,  as  62,  63,  64  (S.,  vii,  11,8,  9). 

E  4 


52-55    AURIGNACIAN  ?       56-67     CORES.       6S,  69    Wedge  Forms. 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egj-pt. 


73 


70-90     SOLUTREAN. 


74  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

A  strange  wedge-shaped  type  68,  69,  belongs  to  the  age  of  the  ovoid  flints, 
53~S5>  as  68  was  found  in  the  settlement  with  those.  The  purpose  of  it  is  not 
clear,  as  it  would  neither  cut,  scrape,  nor  dig. 

We  now  reach  one  of  the  clearest  stages  in  the  Egyptian  series,  that  of  the  Fayum 
flints,  found  at  Dimeh  and  other  sites  to  the  west  of  the  Lake.  Here,  unhappily,  as 
to  records,  we  are  even  worse  off  than  in  the  Nile  Valley.  The  whole  of  the  300 
specimens  in  University  College  have  been  found  by  natives,  and  are  without  any 
history.  Most  of  them  I  selected  at  a  dealer's  from  a  barrel-full  of  many  thousands, 
in  order  to  show  all  varieties  of  types.  The  main  fact  which  seems  obvious  about 
them  is  their  close  equivalence  to  the  Solutrean  family  of  Europe.  The  total 
absence  of  these  types  from  the  cemetery  age  of  pre-historic  Egypt  shows  that 
they  must  precede  that  period.  The  peculiarities  of  the  Solutrean  types  are  as 
follow :  (a)  The  thin  leaf-shaped  blades,  as  in  Fig.  70,  from  mid  Solutrean  age  of 
Laugerie  (Haute?)  (S.,  Fig.  62),  parallel  with  Fig.  71,  from  the  Fayum.  This  and 
many  other  Fayum  forms  were  made  from  thin  natural  layers  of  flint,  which  saved 
the  trouble  of  making  a  flat  plate  of  flint  to  begin  with  ;  but  the  faulty  surface  of 
the  layer  could  not  be  removed,  and  spoils  the  appearance  of  the  face,  (b)  Flakes 
were  worked  down  to  pointed  forms  for  boring,  as  72  (Grotte  de  I'Eglise,  M.,  no) 
and  73  (Solutr^,  M.,  122);  the  same  type  appears  in  74,  75,  and  76.  (c)  The 
vesica  form,  equally  pointed  at  each  end  is  also  found,  as  'J^  from  Grotte  de  I'Eglise, 
Dordagne  (M.,  106),  and  from  the  Fayum  78  and  79.  (D)  Thin  flakes,  pointed, 
and  with  a  rounded  butt  are  found  at  Solutre,  80,  81  (M.,  118,  119),  and  very 
commonly  in  the  Fayum,  as  82  to  85,  and  89.  (e)  Thicker  flints,  roughly 
chipped  on  the  face,  as  the  mid  Solutrean  86  from  Kleine  Offnet  (S.,  xvi,  7), 
are  also  found  in  this  group,  87.  (f)  The  small  curved  knives  91  to  93  are 
usual,  and  many  have  a  thick  unworked  handle,  as  93,  94,  95,  left  with  a  thick, 
flat,  edge  to  bear  against  the  hand.  This  is  the  best  adaptation  for  the  hand 
that  is  found  in  flint  work.  The  narrow  worked  blade,  96,  is  like  the  forms  from 
the  Grotte  de  I'Eglise,  97,  98  (M.,  108,  109).  (g)  The  prismatic  rods  of  flint 
worked  on  all  faces,  are  characteristic  of  this  age,  as  99  (Denmark,  M.,  396),  100 
and  loi  (Mentone,  M.,  117,  116),  and  such  also  belong  to  the  Fayum,  102. 
(h)  Small  equal-ended  forms  are  often  found  minutely  chipped  over  the  whole 
surface,  as  103,  105,  106,  125,  127,  129;  and  parallels  to  these  come  from  Solutr^, 
126,  128  (M.  99,  95). 

Of  arrowheads  the  nearest  parallels  to  the  Fayum  types  are  109  Aveyron 
(with  bronze  (?),  M.,  387),  in  Denmark  (M.,  397),  120  Aveyron  (M.,  386),  123 
Aveyron  (M.,  379).  Most  of  these  are  worked  over  both  faces;  but  n2  and  n6 
are  flat  on  the  back.  Of  the  smaller  forms,  133-135,  there  are  very  few  in  other 
countries;  the  nearest  forms  being  132,  from  Lago  di  Garda  (M.,  391),  134  from 
Mayence  (M.,  371),  and  the  elaborate  work  of  141,  from  Portugal  (M.,  374). 

Saw  flints  are  common  in  the  Fayum,  as  147-149,  and  are  nearly  like  the 
Danish  type,  146  (M.,  352).  Such  saw  flints  probably  continued  to  be  made  into 
later  times.  Sickle  flints,  with  smaller  teeth  and  curved  edge  do  not  appear  in  the 
Fayum,  but  were  very  common  in  historic  times,  even  down  to  the  XVHIth 
dynasty.  The  handled  knife,  150,  151,  appears  in  the  Fayum  group;  but  it  looks 
as  if  it  must  be  an  intrusion,  picked  up  by  the  native  collectors  from  some  source 
different  to  the  rest  of  the  series,  as  it  borders  on  the  type  of  the  1st  dynasty. 

153  to  157  are  peculiar  forms,  of  which  the  sources  are  unknown.  The  small 
flints  with  a  straight  base  are  found  in  Europe,  1 58  at  the  Lake  of  Constance,  1 59  at 
Doubs  (M.,  369,  370) ;   they  are   curiously  close   to    160  from   the  settlement  at 


93     94     95    96 


>97    .  98 


99  100  101  102  103   104  105  106  107   ^^^  109 


no  111 


I         W  117  118119  120  121    ^^ 

112113114115116  4   I   4   A   4    ^Hi 


122    123   124 


W 


127    128     iraS       130 


126  126 


131 


91-145     SOLUTREAN. 


76  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

Naqadeh.  This  borders  on  the  flat-based  and  round-ended  type  i6l  from  the  same 
site,  and  162  to  164.  The  latter  two  are  finely  worked,  with  the  under  side  a 
remarkably  flat  fracture ;  the  purpose  of  this  type  is  unknown. 

The  round  scraper  is  common  in  Egypt.  165  to  168  all  have  a  single  flat  face 
below,  and  are  almost  flat  above,  with  well  rounded  edge  chipping.  165  is  from 
the  settlement  at  Naqadeh,  i66  from  i.ocx)  feet  over  the  plain  at  Thebes. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


(  To  be  continued^ 


146-149    Soi.UTREAN.      150-168    Uncertain. 


(     78     ) 


MORE   OF   THE   EARLIEST   INSCRIPTIONS. 

Since  the  account  of  the  earliest  inscriptions,  on  the  cylinders,  was  given  in 
Ancient  Egvpt  (1914,  p.  61),  a  large  group  of  twenty-eight  more  such  inscriptions 
has  been  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Blanchard  of  Cairo,  who  has  collected  them  for 
some  years  past.  I  have  particularly  to  thank  him  for  making  a  set  of  casts,  which 
he  has  kindly  given  me  for  study ;  from  these  the  present  drawings  are  made,  and 
I  hope  to  publish  them  in  photograph  when  the  general  catalogue  of  cylinders  may 
be  issued. 

For  facility  of  reference  these  fresh  inscriptions  are  numbered  on  from  the 
previous  series  which  ended  at  No.  75.  Beside  the  twenty-eight  here  of  the  earliest 
class  there  are  a  few  of  historic  times,  continuing  the  numbers  to  108. 
Mr.  Blanchard's  cylinders,  being  obtained  from  natives  coming  to  Cairo,  are  mainly 
derived  from  Lower  and  Middle  Egypt,  and  some  are  known  to  come  from  the 
Delta.  In  accordance  with  this  there  are  twelve  with  the  seated  figure,  which  we 
have  already  noticed  (1914,  p.  66)  as  being  the  prototype  of  the  Memphite  steles  ; 
while  there  are  only  two  of  the  a&khu  bird.s,  which  are  like  those  on  the  steles  of 
Abydos.  The  distinction  of  these  types,  belonging  to  the  North  and  South 
respectively,  is  therefore  confirmed.  The  inscriptions  are  here  grouped  in  the  same 
manner  as  those  before  published. 


Seated  Figures,  76-87. 

No.  76  apparently  only  bears  the  personal  name  Nebsneit,  a  name  given  as 
dedicating  the  child  to  the  goddess,  "  Her  mistress  is  Neit." 

No.  77  has  the //^^//i  formula,  •' May  she  be  like  unto  Neit;"  and  the  name 
Hekasen,  meaning  "  Magic  conforms — or  unites — the  worshipper  with  the  gods." 

No.  78  has  only  the  theth  formula,  "  Like  unto  Neit  and  Hen."  In  No.  38  Hen 
occurs,  apparently  as  a  deity  parallel  to  Neit.  It  may  be  an  early  form  of  writing 
the  god  Henena  who  is  named  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (Pepy  I,  636). 

No.  79  bears  the  name  Kanebneit,  referring  like  No.  76  to  a  child  being 
dedicated  to  Neit — "  The  mistress  of  the  ka  is  Neit." 

No.  80  is  another  Neit  name,  Auotesneit,  "  Neit  is  her  inheritance." 

No.  81  appears  to  read  Pekhetncit,  meaning,  "This  offering  to  Neit,"  or  "This 
thing  is  of  Neit,"  or  "  It  is  a  thing  of  Neit,"  another  form  of  dedicating  a  child  to 
the  goddess. 

No.  82  reads,  "  Like  unto  Ahat,  like  to  the  circulating  moon."  The  cow  Ahat 
was  the  divine  mother,  identified  with  Isis  as  mother  of  Horus,  and  hence  connected 
with  the  moon.  This  suggests  that  the  favourite  early  names  Beb,  Beba,  Bebu, 
Beba-onkh,  Beba-res,  Beba-senb,  and  others,  may  all  refer  to  the  moon-mother 
goddess. 

No.  83  appears  to  read  as  the  name  Zesa,  meaning  "  to  revive,"  with  sa  sa, 
repeated  parts  of  the  name. 


More  of  the  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


79 


HER  M\J>TKES5-V5  NEIT. 


/^^H'^Tf '^ 


i  u 


i  ^      ^LtJill" 


LIKE     NEIT 


f'    fil     ^  ^f  ^'£1^- 


i_iKE    HEN«»-NEIT 


f    f|     el 

N£lT    IS   HER    IMHERITANCE 


m^JW-'^ 


^^^ 


iw 


80 


81 


"f^f.   >/. 


^^,.  ^<'     ^^/.::^'^ 


A/- 


TO  KEVIVE 

y 

AN  OFFERING 


82 


y^invx 


85 


SHEPSES  o/</^ 


't'.. 


1-ffift 


86 


87 


8o  More  of  the  Earliest  Inscriptions. 

No.  84  is  partly  broken,  but  the  imperfect  signs  point  to  there  being  three 
repetitions  of  the  same  group. 

No.  85  is  an  invocation  to  Mut,  "  May  she  be  united  to  Mut,  grant  her  union." 
The  name  Sen-mut,  "  united  to  Mut,"  occurs  on  another  cylinder,  No.  74,  and  is 
familiar  as  that  of  the  well-known  architect  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

No.  86  begins  with  a  sign  which  is  not  certainly  identified.  It  is  probably  the 
sethet  sign,  the  early  form  of  which  is  seen  on  the  ivory  gaming  slip  of  King  Qa 
{Royal  Tombs,  I,  xvii,  30) ;  this  may  be  the  same  as  the  sign  o  used  for  "  a  caravan." 
As  sethet  designates  both  the  people  of  the  First  Cataract  and  the  Asiatics,  it  may 
well  be  that  the  two  signs  are  identical,  and  mean  "  nomads"  or  "desert  dwellers." 
This  cylinder  belonged  then  to  the  sealer  of  the  caravan  goods,  or  customs  officer, 
named  Shepses.  The  sign  in  question  seems  as  if  it  was  a  bundle  of  goods  rolled 
in  a  cloth,  and  secured  by  tying  it  up  at  each  end.  Such  a  form  of  bundle  is  earlier 
than  a  sewn-up  sack,  and  would  be  suited  for  putting  across  an  animal's  back. 
Bundles  like  this  I  have  often  made  up  when  packing  in  Egypt.  Another  sign 
which  looks  as  if  it  might  well  be  of  the  same  origin  is  kep  or  k&p,  meaning  "  to 
hide  " ;  this  may  be  derived  from  the  rolling  up,  and  so  hiding,  things  in  a  cloth. 
The  good  representation  of  the  cylinder  seal,  with  metal  caps  at  each  end,  and  a 
loop  for  suspension,  should  be  noticed. 

No.  87  begins  with  an  invocation  to  Neit,  "  May  she  be  like  Neit"  ;  followed 
by  the  personal  name  Pekashed.  This  sign  shed  occurs  in  very  few  words,  and 
here  it  might  mean,  "  May  this  ka  be  nourished,"  or  "  This  ka  of  the  Persea,"  as  the 
sign  is  used  in  writing  the  name  of  that  tree,  ashed. 

Aakhu  Birds. 

No.  88  appears  to  bear  only  the  personal  name  Aaba,  repeated  in  different 
ways.     The  a&khet  bird  is  like  those  on  cylinders  Nos.  12  to  22. 

No.  89  may  probably  be  names  repeated  in  different  forms. 

No.  90  belonged  to  a  "  Guardian  of  this  house — or  temple  —of  Neit." 

No.  91  reads,  "The  gift  of  Sebek  "  with  the  name  Nefer-hetem.  This  name, 
meaning  "  E.xcellence  of  fulfilment,"  is  evidently  an  exclamation  at  the  birth. 

No.  92  expresses  another  devotion  to  Neit,  "  Neit  makes  perfect."  Here  the 
crocodile,  Sebekt,  is  a  form  of  Neit  {see  Lanzone,  Diz.  Mit.,  1043-4);  the 
association  of  Neit  nursing  two  crocodiles  is  familiar  in  glazed  pottery  amulets. 
The  personal  name  here  appears  to  be  Seba. 

No.  93  reads,  "  Her  ka  is  conformed — or  united— to  Bat."  Here,  in  the  place  of 
the  god's  name  of  the  formula,  appears  to  be  the  bee.  As  no  god  is  known  named 
Bat,  it  seems  that  this  is  a  prayer  to  be  conformed  to  the  king,  so  as  to  accompany 
him  in  his  life  with  the  gods. 

No.  94  is  confused  with  many  repetitions.  It  is  a  prayer  for  conformity  or 
union  with  the  god  Sa,  who  appears  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (Unas  439)  and  also  later. 
He  wa?  one  of  the  gods  accompanying  Ra.  As  T  or  Tet  is  brought  into  the 
formula,  that  is  probably  the  personal  name. 

No.  95  bears  a  simple  prayer,  "  Living  gods  give  life" ;  or  perhaps,  in  view  of 
a  minute  adkhu  bird  between  the  neter  signs,  it  might  read,  "  Gods  of  the  Living 
Spirits  give  life." 

No.  96  has  the  name  of  a  high  priestess,  "  The  Divine  Wife,  Shedt."  The  sign 
below  may  possibly  be  a  form  of  the  hand  which  usually  is  written  along  with  the 
shed  sign. 


More  of  the  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


8i 


VA-^ 


^m^y^^' 


^:^T*^rP89 


^ 


wt  X  n     ^ 


o^.         '"o    "'■ 


^^/;.       "^'''^'.^^A. 


/ii:i  t 


*■'■-        -.Z'+r*  GIFT      OF      SEBEK 


a\ 


**<>-/,  "^^^U.. 
'^^^,''> 


i. 


91 


^1 


NEIT   MAKES  PERfECT 


-Pa' 


1^0211  rm  93 


•«-,>  ">f^'3"'. 


^^rr^  'lilEf" 


SWEOT 


^  ^   -ftr  r 

</;^^  **^^^        LIVING    CODS 

WIFE   oriME  COD 


'ft'lS'ftSP  95 


f 


96 


^  '»>y,         PRIEST  PMtSTOT  tO^AKANDE^ 

*f;^      ^•S^     or    6A,  TEHUTI  OF  THE    KHEMT   HAUU 


97 


82  More  oj  the  Earliest  Inscriptions. 

No.  97  is  the  largest  early  cylinder  that  is  known.  It  belonged  to  an  official 
who  was  "  Commander  of  the  khent  hall  of  the  palace,  priest  of  Tehuti,  Ba,  and 
Anpu."  It  is  noticeable  that  this  earliest  known  writing  of  Tehuti  is  repeatedly 
expressed  by  two  birds,  suggesting  the  dual,  as  in  the  termination  of  the  name 
Tehuti  Similarly,  the  name  of  the  god  Mehti  is  written  with  two  hawks ;  and  the 
plural  names  Heru,  Khnumu,  and  others,  written  with  three  animals. 

No.  98  is  not  clear  in  its  structure.  It  would  seem  to  read,  "  May  she  go  forth 
conformed  from  the  khent  hall,"  with  the  personal  name  Sha.  The  klunt  hall  was 
the  portico  of  the  palace  ;  and,  from  that,  of  the  temple.  In  it  the  royal  purification 
took  place  before  admission  to  the  temple ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  ordinary 
worshippers  were  only  admitted  thus  far.  Here  it  was  then  that  conformity  or 
union  with  the  gods  would  be  ceremonially  sought. 

No.  99  has  apparently  the  personal  name  Erdanefer,  "  Being  well  given,"  like 
the  Greek  name  Eudoros.     The  title  or  prayer  is  not  clear. 

No.  100  has  the  same  title  as  No.  69,  the  "  Opener  of  the  canal  banks"  at  the 
inundation.     The  name  is  Nuna,  the  devotee  of  Nun,  the  primitive  water-god. 

No.  101.  The  Maltese  cross  sign  is  probably  tm,  as  in  No.  58.  The  name 
Unn-ka  expresses  the  satisfaction  at  the  continuance  of  the  family  ka  re-incarnated 
in  the  new-born  child,  "  The  ka  exists,"  or  continues  to  be. 

No.  102  is  much  worn,  and  not  intelligible. 

No.  103  has  a  well-known  title  of  pyramid  times,  the  her  seshta,  or  secretary, 
in  the  form  her  khettn  sesh  neb,  "  over  the  sealing  of  all  writings."  The  personal 
name  appears  to  be  Seza,  meaning  to  revive  or  make  healthy. 

No.  104  is  of  a  different  workmanship,  and  much  worn  in  parts.  It  apparently 
did  not  bear  any  inscription  similar  to  those  here  considered. 

No.  105  may  contain  the  name  of  an  early  king  beginning  Ar ;  he  was 

prophet  of  Hathor  who  presided  over  the  duat  hall  of  the  palace,  or  of  the  temple. 

No.  106  is  of  Khafra  beloved  by  Hathor. 

No.  107  is  the  same  inscription. 

No.  108  is  a  portion  of  a  cylinder  of  Sahura.  The  inscription  is  too  much 
broken  to  be  safely  restored. 

It  is  satisfactory  to  see  that  nearly  all  of  these  cylinders  are  intelligible  as  to 
their  structure,  and  most  of  them  read  as  reasonably  as  the  short  expressions  of 
later  times. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


More  of  the  Earliest  Inscriptions. 


83 


ca    zn*=^i 


#vA.'»-^ 


II 


n 


fi.^N.  ""oiiy 


^.^''^^J'^^y^or^o'l^. 


I 


,■".-,■"<  r^-.^"*.:' 


Svilg.s 


U™4> 


U/=l 


\_/ 


99 


100 


KJ^i^iiiQi 


/TA  I  4^.-1111  102 


+ 


5  (S 


.-*«e> 


JrtlSTKESS 

in  the  j3uat 
(palace) 


PM)PUtT  OF 


^ 


O 


LOVED    &Y 


HATHOR  ^-1 

o 

1i^ 


I  r 

6000 

cos 


pp^ 


KHAFRA      LOVED    BY 
HATHOR 

O 


SAHURA 


*t 


121 


m 


^r^ 

bf 


105 


lirlrl        1 

106 


U\ 


107 


(£Kr 


108 


F   2 


(     84     ) 


REVIEWS. 


T lie  Rock  Tombs  of  Meir.  Vol.  I,  The  Tomb-chapel  of  U kh-hetef' s  son  Senbi. — 
A.  M.  Blackman.  4to,  41  pp.,  33  plates.  25^.  (Archaeological  Survey  of 
Egypt,  Vol.  XXII.) 

This  book  contains  a  thorough  account  of  one  of  the  tombs  at  Meir,  of  the 
beginning  of  the  Xllth  dynasty.  The  whole  is  given  in  drawing,  which  is  of 
sufficient  scale  in  the  key  plates  and  the  details  ;  while  the  more  important  parts 
appear  in  thirty-four  photographs,  and  six  colour  photographs.  The  general  type 
of  the  tomb  is  intermediate  between  those  of  Deshasheh  and  of  Benihasan,  as  it  is 
also  intermediate  in  both  its  locality  and  age.  A  catalogue  of  the  tombs  of  Meir, 
of  the  Vlth  and  Xllth  dynasties  is  given  ;  and  genealogies  of  three  generations  in 
the  earlier  group,  and  seven  generations  in  the  later.  Especially  may  be  com- 
mended the  translating  of  the  short  sentences  over  the  scenes,  which  have  been  too 
often  neglected  owing  to  their  obscure  brevity.  Many  points  of  interest  are 
mentioned  or  discussed  in  the  description.  The  nomarchs  in  the  middle  of  the 
Xllth  dynasty  assumed  much  of  royal  attributes;  behind  Ukh-hetep  V  is  the 
formula  "  All  protection,  life,  stability,  and  happiness,  all  health,  all  joy,  behind  the 
Nomarch,  over  the  priests,  Ukh-hetep,  for  ever,"  and  he  is  shown  holding  the  onkh 
like  a  king  or  god.  The  type  of  the  herdsmen  is  in  some  cases  clearly  not 
Egyptian,  and  is  identified  by  Prof.  Seligman  with  that  of  the  Beja  tribes  in  the 
eastern  desert.  The  art  of  the  tomb  shows  a  peculiar  development  toward 
naturalism,  rising  between  the  Vlth  and  Xllth  dynasties  ;  as  such  a  movement  is 
not  traceable  in  the  contemporary  Dendereh  series  of  sculptures  it  would  seem  to 
have  come  in  from  the  north,  perhaps  owing  to  the  Asiatic  invasion  at  the  close  of 
the  Old  Kingdom.  The  figures  are  shown  in  side  view,  without  displaying  the 
whole  width  of  the  shoulders,  as  in  PI.  XXI,  2,  3,  4.  The  men  as  well  as  women 
are  coloured  yellow  ;  and  though  the  copper-red  Egyptian  is  not  likely  to  have 
been  really  modified,  yet  a  Semitic  rule  may  have  made  a  yellow  skin  to  be 
regarded  as  the  correct  tone.  A  long  spiral  side  lock  of  hair  sometimes  is  shown, 
which  is  not  Egyptian.  There  is  a  discussion  of  the  ukh  emblem,  which  was 
a  fetish  of  Hathor,  so  sacred  that  the  ruling  family  took  from  it  their  name  of 
Ukh-hetep.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  disc  with  a  pendent  uraeus  on  either  side, 
crowned  with  two  straight  feathers,  and  supported  on  a  lotus  handle,  decorated 
with  a  bow  tie  and  ends,  or  perhaps  a  menat  collar  as  Mr.  Blackman  suggests. 
Against  the  latter  interpretation  it  .should  be  noted  that  there  was  only  one 
pendent  menat  to  a  bead  collar,  not  two  ends  as  figured  here.  A  point  to 
remember  is  that  the  hieroglyph  of  Kusae  is  not  a  man  with  two  giraffes,  but  with 
two  long-necked  panthers  like  those  on  the  Narmer  palette.  One  point  may  be 
reconsidered  ;  in  a  footnote  it  is  said  that  the  reaper  in  the  Kamara  papyrus 
(Ancient  Egypt,  1914,  p.  26)  has  his  head  protected  by  a  sack.  Such  would 
certainly  not  be  needed  by  any  Egyptian  during  the  spring  harvest  season.     It 


Reviews.  85 

rather  seems  to  be  a  linen  bag  to  hold  the  ears  of  corn,  hitching  on  over  the  head 
and  hanging  down  on  the  shoulders ;  this  would  be  parallel  to  the  linen  bag  worn 
on  the  hip  by  harvesters  in  the  Ilird  dynasty  {Medum,  XXVIII,  Tomb  22). 

The  terrible  indictment  of  past  neglect  and  injury,  by  plunderers  and 
authorised  excav^ators,  which  is  given  without  comment,  is  the  best  of  reasons  for 
hoping  that  all  the  other  tombs  of  this  district  will  be  fully  published  as  in  this 
volume ;  and  that  scientific  excavation  may  yet  save  a  fraction  of  the  amount  that 
has  been  wantonly  destroyed  by  the  past  generation. 

Prolegomena  zur  Geschichte  der  Zwerghaften  Goiter  in  Aegypten.  VON  Franz 
Ballod.  8vo,  103  pp.,  119  figures,  with  Russian  abstract  11  pp.  (Liessner, 
Moskau.)     191 3. 

One  of  the  greatest  needs  of  Egyptology  at  present  is  to  form  complete  guides 
to  all  that  is  known  about  the  various  gods.  The  study  here  of  Bes  and  allied 
gods,  by  a  former  Russian  scholar  of  Prof  von  Bissing,  is  therefore  welcome ;  but 
appearing  as  a  doctoral  dissertation  published  at  Moscow  it  may  escape  notice, 
and  does  not  appear  in  Mr.  GriflFith's  ample  bibliography.  We  therefore  give  an 
abstract  of  the  work  here. 

The  variou.s  names  of  Besi-form  gods  are  Bes,  Hayt  or  Hatti,  Ahti,  Ohaiu, 
Tettnu,  Sept  or  Sopdu,  and  Segeb.  The  sources  of  these  gods  are  stated  from  all 
authorities.  The  usual  opinion  is  for  the  Punite  origin,  probably  South  Arabian ; 
and  some  connect  Bes  with  the  Semitic  bus,  "  to  tread  down,"  bcsay,  "  a  conqueror," 
referring  to  the  warrior  figures  ;  others  with  the  Egyptian  bHsu,  "  the  panther," 
referring  to  the  skin  dress  of  the  god.  The  various  aspects  of  Bes  are  quoted,  as 
the  god  of  dance,  music,  joy,  toilet,  of  women,  of  birth  and  infancy,  and  of  defence 
with  sword  and  shield.  If  we  had  to  give  a  single  expression  for  the  god,  we  could 
only  call  him  "  protector  of  domestic  joy." 

Next  is  given  the  chronology  of  Bes.  First,  with  names.  Of  the  Middle  Kingdom 
is  the  inscribed  headrest  (Brit.  Mus.)  and  figures  of  Ohati  (ivory  wand).  In  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty  is  Ohaiu  (Book  of  the  Dead,  XXVIII).  Ptolemaic  figures  are  of 
Bes  and  Hayt,  Roman  of  Ahti,  Bes  and  Hayt  or  Hatti.  With  foreign  attributes  is 
Sopd,  smiter  of  the  Mentiu,  Tetten,  and  Hayt.  Bes  is  assimilated  to  other  gods,  as 
Segeb,  Min-Hor,  Mafdet,  and  Omom.  Second,  are  dated  figures  without  names ; 
various  dwarfs  of  the  prehistoric  in  stone  and  ivory,  and  on  seals  ;  Middle  Kingdom 
figures  on  ivory  wands,  and  the  box  of  Rifeh.  In  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  figures 
abound,  on  an  ivory  wand,  birth  scene  of  Hatshepsut,  amulets,  scarabs,  spoons, 
furniture  and  vases.  One  of  the  finest  examples — here  unmentioned — is  the  ebony 
and  electrum  toilet  bo.x  of  Amenhetep  II  at  Edinburgh.  Of  later  dynasties  there 
are  scarabs,  amulets  (mainly  XXIInd),  rough  vases  (XXIIIrd-VIth),  the  Bes  pillars 
(XXVth  and  Roman),  complex  polytheist  figures  of  Bes  as  on  the  Metternich  stele, 
the  Serapeum  bronze,  and  the  great  amulet  {^Amulets,  \  l^ad),  and  lastly,  the  Roman 
terracotta  figures.     The  Nubian  forms  follow. 

The  last  section  is  on  the  types  of  Bes,  classifying  the  above  material  by  the 
forms.  The  dates  of  appearance  of  all  the  details  and  varieties  of  the  types  are 
stated, — the  best  summation  in  the  book.  Then  follows  a  classified  list  of  all  the 
varieties  of  types  used  in  different  ways,  with  hundreds  of  references  to  publications. 
The  important  female  form  of  Bes  is  only  glimpsed  in  seven  lines ;  it  needs  much 
fuller  treatment. 

All  this  is  termed  Prolegomena  to  the  history  of  the  dwarf-gods,  and  we  must 
hope  therefore  that  the  study  will  be  continued  in  various  lines  of  research.    Though 

F  3 


86  Revieivs. 

continually  speaking  of  the  zwerghaften  gods,  yet  the  whole  subject  of  the  real 
dwarf-god  Ptah-seker  is  not  touched.  That  is  a  very  complex  matter  ;  the  obscure 
relations  to  Ptah  and  Seker,  and  to  the  pataikoi,  need  much  elucidation.  In  the 
whole  treatment  we  need  to  define  the  range  of  the  meanings  of  the  various  forms, 
— the  relations  to  other  gods  in  Egypt  and  in  other  lands, — the  functions  of  the 
dwarf-gods.  The  method  needs  to  deal  more  with  the  facts  on  which  all  is  based, 
and  not  with  copious  quotations  of  opinions.  It  matters  most  what  are  the  basic 
facts ;  how  writers  have  understood  them  is  quite  secondary.  The  present  work  is 
too  mechanical  in  piling  together  references,  which  largely  mean  repetitions  of  the 
same  material, — too  much  an  "emptying  of  note  books."  As  such  it  contains  very 
useful  material ;  but  it  needs  much  weeding.  If  the  author  will  proceed  to  the 
constructive  task  of  welding  his  prolegomena,  and  producing  a  real  history  from 
all  that  can  be  gleaned  about  dwarf-gods,  fortified  by  parallels  in  other  religions,  and 
with  just  enough  of  past  opinions  to  show  what  is  already  accepted,  he  will  do  a 
most  valuable  and  permanent  work.  We  hope  also  that  future  illustrations  may  be 
larger  and  more  distinct. 

Palestine  Exploration  Fund ;  Quarterly  Statement,  Jan.,  1915.    8vo,  52  pp.    2s. 

This  number  contains  various  papers  of  interest  connected  with  Egypt. 
Lieut.  Trumper  discusses  the  route  of  the  Exodus  from  a  personal  study  of  the 
region.  The  key  of  his  position  is  that  Marah  is  Ayun  Musa.  Thence  he  traces 
back,  three  days'  journey  (Ex.  xv,  22),  and  reaches  a  site  which  he  proposes  for 
the  crossing  opposite  Gebel  Geneffeh,  where  he  supposes  Migdol  to  have  been. 
He  fully  accepts  the  position  of  Pithom,  and  takes  the  milestone  found  there  as 
proving  that  Clysma  was  eight  miles  from  Ero,  or  Pithom,  and  therefore  not  to  be 
sought  for  at  Suez.  In  all  this  there  are  several  matters  which  are  not  taken  into 
account.  The  Antonine  Itinerary  proves  that  there  was  a  Clysma  near  Suez, 
doubtless  the  present  Kolzum  north  of  Suez.  But  as  the  name  Clysma  merely 
means  a  shore,  the  milestone  proves  that  there  was  a  shore,  or  edge  of  a  lake  or 
sea,  at  eight  miles  east  of  Pithom.  In  the  itinerary  in  Exodus  it  is  certain  that 
undistinctive  stages  are  not  noticed.  From  Etham,  which  ail  agree  was  about 
Ismailiyeh,  there  are  but  five  days'  journey  specified  in  going  south  to  Elim,  which 
must  be  Wady  Gharandel.  The  distance  is  no  miles,  so  probably  three  days  at 
least  are  not  specified.  This  being  the  case,  it  seems  more  likely  that  Marah  next 
before  Elim  is  the  bitter  Ayn  Hawareh,  a  few  miles  north  of  Gharandel,  as  that  is 
three  days  in  the  wilderness  from  the  last  fresh  water.  Then  the  unspecified  days' 
journey  were  either  before  or  after  the  crossing,  and  thus  the  position  of  the 
crossing  is  not  fixed,  and  may  probably  have  been  in  the  shallows  near  Sheykh 
Henedik,  rather  than  in  the  deepest  part  of  the  Bitter  Lakes.  As  to  Rameses, 
which  Mr.  Trumper  would  place  north  of  Pithom,  there  is  no  chance  of  its  being 
out  in  the  open  desert ;  the  only  possible  site  for  it  is  Tell  Retabeh,  where 
monuments  of  Rameses  II  and  III  exist. 

Prof  Macalister  gives  an  account  of  a  collection  of  pottery  at  Jerusalem, 
with  four  photographs  of  groups  by  the  owner,  Mr.  Herbert  Clark.  The  open 
dish  lamp  is  of  seventh-century  Greek  origin,  as  at  Naukratis.  The  pottery 
alabastra  forms  are  Ptolemaic  ;  in  alabaster  they  may  be  of  Persian  period  but 
not  earlier. 

Mr.  Offord  writes  on  the  former  extent  of  the  papyrus  growth  in  Egypt. 

Mr.  Stanley  Cook  gives  a  summary  of  an  important  paper  by  Prof  Max 
Miiller  {Jewish   Quarterly   Review,  April,    1914)  on    a    papyrus  of  the   reign  of 


Reviews.  87 

Tahutimes  III,  now  at  Petrograd.  This  contains  a  list  of  envoys  from  a  dozen 
cities  of  Syria,  which  must  have  been  the  residences  of  petty  chiefs.  These  places 
are :  (i)  Megiddo ;  (2)  Kinneroth,  near  Tiberias ;  (3)  Yakasipu,  Achshaph  ; 
(4)  Shamaduna,  supposed  to  be  Shabbethon  ;  (5)  Taanach  ;  (6)  [Ru]  ?-sha'ara, 
supposed  to  be'a  Rosh-El,  "  God's  Summit " ;  (7)  Tinni  (unexplained),  perhaps 
Dan  or  Tipunu-Dibon ;  (8)  Sharon;  (9)  Ashkelon ;  (10)  Khusura,  Hazor  ; 
(11)  Hatuma,  unknown;  (12)  Rakisha,  Lachish,  the  first  mention  of  that  city. 
We  should  note  that  these  names  appear  to  fall  in  two  separate  groups  geographi- 
cally, 1-8  in  Galilee,  9-12  in  S.W.  Palestine.  The  Egyptian  names  (see  Jewish 
Quarterly  Review)  are  transliterated  in  the  system  we  use  here,  as  follows,  with 
probable  equivalents  : — 

I.  Maketa       Megiddo. 


2.  Kinnaratu  ... 

3.  Yakasipu    ... 

4.  Shamar(d)una 

5.  Taonaki 

6.  Shaora 

7.  Tlnni 

8.  Saruna 


Kinneroth,  near  Tiberias. 
Achshaph,  Yasif,  6  N.E.  of  Acco. 
Shimron,  5  W.  of  Nazareth. 
Taanach,  4  S.W.  of  Megiddo. 
Sh'arah,  i|  S.W.  of  Sarona. 
Denna,  7  S.  of  Sarona. 
Esh-Sharon,  Sarona,  6  S.W.  of  Tiberias. 
The  furthest  apart  of  these  places  are  3  and  5,  30  miles  apart. 

The  southern  group  is  to  the  south-east  of  Ascalon  : — 
9.  Osqaluna    ...         ...     Ashkelon. 

10.  Husura       ...         ...     Hazor,  Hadattah,  near  Ashkelon. 

11.  Hatuma      Etam,  12  E.S.E.  of  Lakhish. 

12.  Lakisha      ...         ...     Lakhish. 

Some  of  the  identifications  proposed  by  Prof  Max  Miiller  differ  from  these. 
Shamaduna,  also  read  Shamaruna  by  Prof.  Golenischeff,  M.M.  identifies  with 
Shabtuna  of  Thothmes  HI,  now  Shebtin,  9  E.  of  Lydda,  which  does  not  belong 
to  the  Galilee  group.  Saruna,  now  Sarona  by  Tiberias,  M.M.  connects  with  the 
plain  of  Sharon,  which  does  not  agree  to  its  position  in  the  lists.  Shaora  (or 
(Sha'ara),  M.M.  conjecturally  reads  Rosh-El,  but  does  not  identify  it.  It  seems  to 
be  Sh'arah  by  Sarona.  For  Tlnni  M.M.  suggests  Dan  or  Dibon,  but  Denna  is 
near  Sarona.  In  the  southern  group  the  Hazor  Hadattah  is  named  by  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  as  near  Ascalon.  Hatuma  is  not  identified  by  M.M.,  but  with  the 
weak  h  it  may  well  be  Etam,  the  position  of  which  is  not  certain,  but  supposed  to 
be  as  above.  The  only  way  to  deal  with  ancient  names  is  to  observe  the 
geographical  grouping,  and  then  to  search  the  map  exhaustively  in  the  probable 
region. 

Cairo  Scientific  Journal,  August,  1914.  \s.  (Wesley  and  Son.) 
Though  this  useful  Journal  is  mostly  occupied  with  modern  questions,  it 
contains  also  some  papers  of  archaeological  interest.  In  the  above  number  is 
a  valuable  account  of  "  Customs,  Superstitions  and  Songs  of  the  Western  Oases," 
by  Mr.  Harding  King.  In  Khargeh  Oasis  is  a  procession  of  a  Mahmal,  which  is 
claimed  as  being  the  origin  of  the  Cairo  Mahmal  that  goes  yearly  to  Mecca. 
A  camel  bears  a  tent  in  which  is  a  hereditary  occupant,  who  receives  small 
offerings  from  the  people.  It  may  well  be  that  an  early  custom  is  thus  preserved  ; 
and  as  the  Cairo  Mahmal  is  said  to  have  originated  in  1272,  it  was  certainly 
imported  into  Islam,  and  probably  had  some  earlier  source.     . 

F  4 


88  Reviews. 

The  most  striking  custom  is  that  seven  days  after  birth  the  child  is  placed  in 
a  sieve  with  salt  and  grains  of  corn  ;  these  are  sifted  through  and  scattered  in  the 
village.     "  The  ceremony  is  then  completed  by  the  father  of  the  child  trundling 

the  sieve  like  a  hoop  through  the  streets  of  the  village, the  sieve  is  trundled 

about  so  that  when  the  child  grows  up  he  may  be  able  to  run  quickly.  This 
custom  is  common  to  both  Khargeh  and  Dakhleh."  This  exactly  explains 
a  curious  scene  in  the  birth  sculptures  at  Deir  el-Bahri  and  elsewhere.  After 
the  birth  of  the  child  it  is  nursed  by  the  goddesses,  and  presented  to  the  gods  ; 
after  that  appears  Anubis,  rolling  a  disc  along  upon  the  ground  {Deir  el-Bahari,  LV). 
Dr.  Naville  states  (II,  i8)  that  this  scene  recurs  "in  all  the  birth  temples,  except  at 
Luxor  .  .  .  From  the  text  at  Denderah  I  gather  that  this  disc  is  the  moon,  and 
that  the  god  is  presiding  over  the  renewal  of  the  moon."  The  earliest  mention  of 
devotion  to  the  moon,  on  a  cylinder  published  in  this  number  (p.  78),  describes 
it  as  Aoh  ne  beb,  "  the  moon  of  circulating  "  ;  and  the  very  common  names  of  Beb, 
Beba,  Bebu,  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  history  show  how  prominent  was  this  aspect 
of  the  moon.  Thus  the  surviving  belief  that  the  rolling  sieve  is  a  charm  to  give 
quick  running  to  the  child,  agrees  with  the  meaning  of  Anubis  rolling  along  the 
circulating  moon  as  an  emblem  of  motion.  There  may  be  some  further  connection 
of  the  jackal-god  with  the  three  jackal  skins  which  seem  to  originate  the  sign  of 
birth,  nies ;  but  of  this  there  is  not  connective  evidence  as  yet.  At  least  we  can 
now  see  the  survival  of  the  scene  shown  in  the  temples,  and  ascertain  its  import. 

A  custom  agreeing  with  that  in  Southern  Europe  is  that  in  order  "  To  protect 
a  tree  from  the  Evil  eye  and  ensure  a  good  crop,  some  animal's  bone — frequently 
a  skull,  wrapped  up  in  cloth  is  hung  up  in  the  branches,  and  sometimes  small 
doll-like  figures  are  used  in  the  same  way."  The  bucrania  for  protection  were 
well  known  in  Egypt ;  they  appear  over  the  doors  on  a  prehistoric  ivory  carving 
{Hierakonpolis,  XIV),  over  the  shrine  of  the  Fayum  {Tarkhan  I,  ii,  4;  Labyrinth, 
XXIX,  and  ever  after),  and  dozens  of  coloured  skulls  trimmed  for  hanging  up  are 
found  in  the  pan-graves  {Diospolis,  XXXIX).  A  curious  illustration  of  the  persistence 
of  native  custom  in  the  female  line  is  seen  in  the  use  of  songs.  "  There  are  a  number 
of  songs  peculiar  to  the  Oases.  They  are  all  sung  by  women,  while  the  men  sing 
only  Bedouin  songs."  This  agrees  with  other  instances  where  intrusive  custom  is 
restricted  to  the  male  descendants. 

Mr.  G.  W.  Murray  gives  a  brief  notice  of  the  old  mining  camp  of  Bir  Kareim, 
which  has  been  suggested  as  the  site  of  Sety's  establishment  in  the  Turin  mine 
papyrus.  The  existing  remains  seem  to  be  all  Roman.  He  also  mentions  a 
discovery  by  Mr.  G.  B.  Crookston  of  ancient  workings  for  amethyst  near  Gebel 
Abu  Diyeiba,  between  the  phosphate  mines  of  Wasif  and  Um  Huetat.  The 
cavities  with  amethysts  are  in  veins  in  the  granite  which  run  straight  for  hundreds 
of  yards.  These  seem  like  old  faults  filled  up  by  gradual  precipitation.  Such 
a  source  agrees  with  the  abundance  of  amethyst  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  when  Nubia 
was  being  exploited. 


(    89    ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Zeitschrift  fur  Aegypfische  Sprache,  Vol.  LI,  191 4. 

Lacau. — -Suppressions  et  modifications  de  signes  dans  les  textes  func'raires. 
It  is  well  known  that  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  and  in  inscriptions  of  the  Middle 
Kingdom  certain  signs  are  represented  in  a  mutilated  condition.  This  has  been 
recognised  as  due  to  the  belief  that  such  signs  had  in  themselves  a  certain  danger, 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  objects,  which  the  signs  represented,  had  power  to  molest 
and  even  to  kill.  M.  Lacau  points  out  that  the  mutilation,  and  even  suppression, 
of  these  signs  was  carried  out  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  introduced  many  curious 
changes  in  the  orthography.  He  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  these  alterations 
occur  only  in  inscriptions  in  the  actual  burial  chamber,  or  for  the  use  of  the  dead 
only  ;  and  that  the  signs  affected  always  represent  living  creatures. 

Pyramid  Texts. — In  these  inscriptions,  particularly  those  of  Unas  and  Teta, 
the  human  word-signs  or  determinatives,  common  in  other  Old  Kingdom  texts, 
are  suppressed,  and  the  word  is  spelt  out  in  alphabetic  signs.  This  is  not  the 
archaic  method  as  is  usually  supposed,  but  an  abnormal  variation.  In  the  texts  of 
Merema  and  Neferkara  the  earlier  system  is  reintroduced,  but  with  the  signs 
mutilated.  Replacement  of  a  dangerous  sign  by  one  which  is  harmless  or  neutral 
is  also  found.  These  neutral  signs  are  O  1  \  >  often  used  instead  of  a  human  figure, 
especially  in  the  dual  and  plural.     The  human  figure  as  a  word-sign  is  also  replaced 

by  another  sign  having  the  same  phonetic  value,  e.g.,  Ma  the  pronoun  of  the  first 
person  singular  is  replaced  by  (]  ;  in  case  of  a  determinative  the  human  figure  is 
replaced  by  another  sign  which  gives  an  approximate  sense  of  the  word. 
Mutilation  is  the  "  killing  "  of  a  sign  so  as  to  render  it  harmless.  The  mutilation 
of  the  human  figures  consists  in  retaining  the  arms  and  legs  in  the  characteristic 
attitude,  and  eliminating  the  body  and  sometimes  the  head.  The  same  rules 
appear  to  hold  good  as  regards  animals,  with  the  exception  of  the  fish-signs  ;  for 
in  the  whole  of  the  Pyramid  Te.xts  there  is  only  one  representation  of  a  fish 
(N.  5  37)-  The  taboo  on  fish  may  account  for  this  fact;  as  fish  appear  to  have 
been  considered  peculiarly  malevolent,  they  would  be  excluded  from  the  near 
neighbourhood  of  the  dead  king.  •  The  scorpion  is  always  represented   without 

a  tail,  but  for  some  unknown  reason  the  ^^  and  *u=>_  are  never  mutilated. 

Middle  Kingdom. — It  is  remarkable  that  the  suppression  or  mutilation  of 
signs  is  quite  inconsistent  at  this  period.  Thus,  the  double  .sarcophagus  of  Mentu- 
hotep,  now  at  Berlin,  contains  human  figures  in  the  inscriptions  on  the  inner 
sarcophagus,  and  none  at  all  in  the  inscriptions  on  the  outer.  Yet  the  two  were 
made  for  the  same  person  and  probably  in  the  same  workshop.  In  many  instances 
in  Middle  Kingdom  texts  the  human  figure  is  replaced  by  the  vertical  line  |,  which 
is  used  for  man,  woman,  or  child  signs ;  for  the  bearded  man  the  sign  is  rather 
longer.  The  determinatives  of  the  words  for  "  enemy  "  cr  "  death  "  are  replaced  by 
the  diagonal  stroke  \.  For  the  animal  signs  there  is  no  fixed  rule.  The  birds 
are  often  mutilated  by  the  omission  of  the  hinder  parts  including  the  legs.  The 
.serpents  are  represented  with  the  heads  divided  from  the  bodies  ;  the  scorpion  is 


90  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache. 

without  a  tail ;  and  the  royal  wasp  sometimes  has  the  head  cut  off  and  is  sometimes 

replaced  by  its  equivalent   >/•     The  sacred  animals  representing  the  gods  are 

occasionally  omitted  altogether,  the  god's  name  being  then  spelt  out  phonetically 

and  followed  by    | ;  or  the  animal  is  replaced  by  another  emblem  of  the  god. 

New  Kingdom. — The  suppressions  and  modifications  continue  in  the  New 
Kingdom,  though  the  affected  signs  differ  from  those  of  the  earlier  periods.  In 
the  words  for  "enemy"  and  "death  "  the  human  figure  is  replaced  by  the  circle  O 
as  in  the  Pyramid  Te.xts.  On  the  funeral  cloth  of  Thothmes  III  all  knife  signs 
are  omitted  and  the  bird  of  evil  "^^  is  sometimes  suppressed.     In  other  instances 

the  negative  sign  .ju.  is  replaced  by  *aaaaa,  and  the  hand  of  force  L—J  by  d. 

M.  Lacau's  theory  is  that  the  idea  underlying  these  changes  is  the  belief  that 
certain  signs  would  be  able  to  work  harm  to  the  dead  in  the  darkness  of  the  tomb. 

SpiEGELBERG. — Eine  Urkunde  iiher  die  Eroffnitng  fines  Steinbruches  iinter 
Ptolemaios  XIII  (3  plates  and  i  illustration).  A  demotic  inscription  in  a  quarry 
in  Gebel  Sheikh  el-Haridi.  Above  is  a  scene  representing  Ptolemy  XIII  standing 
before  Min,  Horus,  Isis,  Harpocrates  and  Triphis.  The  inscription  recounts  that 
in  the  eleventh  year  of  the  king's  reign  on  the  seventh  of  Tybi,  the  day  of  the 
festival  of  Min,  Psais  son  of  Pe-alal,  with  his  sons  and  brothers,  opened  the  quarry. 

SPIEGELBERG. — Neue  Denktniiler  der  Farthenios,  des  Verwalters  der  Isis  von 
Koptos  ( (  plate  and  5  illustrations).  This  Parthenios,  son  of  Paminis  and  Tapchois, 
is  well  known  from  the  number  of  monuments  dedicated  by  him.  Several  new 
inscriptions  of  his  have  been  discovered  ;  amongst  others  are  the  dedication  of 
a  sandstone  door  at  Koptos  in  honour  of  the  Emperor  Claudius ;  the  draft  of  an 
inscription  recording  repairs  done  to  the  sacred  boat  of  Isis;  and  two  much 
mutilated  records,  one  referring  apparently  to  some  buildings  in  the  temple  of  Isis 
at  Koptos,  the  other  to  the  "  j/^rt-house,"  i.e.,  the  shrine  of  Geb  at  Koptos. 

SPIEGELBERG. — Bin  zweisprtichigcs  Begleitschreiben  cu  einem  Miimcentransport 
(2  illustrations).  A  wooden  label  inscribed  on  one  side  in  Greek,  on  the  other  in 
demotic.  This  is  not  an  ordinary  mummy-label,  but  the  invoice  for  the  transport 
of  a  mummy  to  Panopolis. 

PlEPER. —  Untersuchungcn  zjir  Geschichte  der  XIII Dynastie  {\  plate).  Turin 
royal  papyrus.     Some  new  and  interesting  readings  are  noted  here.     In  column  vii, 

fragment  77, 1.  6,  the  reading  of  the  name  is  undoubtedly  f    O  v    ^    '■ ^'Ssaa.  , 

Ra-sekhem-hu-taui  Sebekhotep,  and  not  as  it  is  so  often  read  f     G  v^^^^^  , 

Ra-sekhem-khu-taui.     In  1.  10  are  the  remains  of  a  name  which  apparently  reads 

O !_]  Jo  ^ ,  Ra-ka-Set.     This  king's  name  is  already  known  on  a  bead  publi-shed 

by  Lcgrain  {Ann.  du  Serv.,  VI,  134).  The  arrangement  of  the  fragments  shows 
that  columns  xi  and  xii  should  contain  the  XVth  and  XVIth  dynasties,  and  this 
is  borne  out  by  the  foreign  names  found  in  them.  In  column  x,  however,  there 
are  .some  interesting  names.     In  fragment  108,  1.  3,  the  king's  name  is  to  be  read 

O  I  i<-'y!0^--,  Ra-.sba ,  not  (    oil  M0is^4,   Ra-snefer  ...     In  fragment  123, 

■  —  -CTv  ^■->. -■  .r»'.\ 


1.   4,    is   a    king  ^f^.  U  J    ^jj  ^^^  "V   I)  ^  ^'    ^^"^^"^*y  ^    ^   foreign    name 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  9I 

corresponding  according   to    Burchardt,   with   the    Canaanitish   ant.      In    1.    5    is 

another  king  U|  [Jj  ^^JJTm^^'*^^  '^"^''  "^"'^  '^  identified  with 
the  ^voiv  of  Manetho.  There  are  three  Hyksos  kings  whose  cartouches  end  with 
t  1,  Ra-nefer-Ica,  Ra-nub-ka,  and  Ra-sma-ka.  From  the  relative  position  of  the 
names  on  the  papyrus  it  seems  probable  that  Ra-nefer-ka  and  Ra-nub-ka  are  the 
kings  in  question. 

Moller's  palaeographical  researches  have  made  it  possible  to  identify  the 
Turin  Papyrus  as  a  document  of  Lower  Egypt  ;  it  must  therefore  embody  the 
historical  tradition  of  the  Delta,  which  was  not  necessarily  the  same  as  that  of 
Upper  Egypt.  In  studying  the  lists  it  is  obvious  that  the  names  of  Egyptian  kings 
fall  into  groups  in  each  dynasty,  both  the  throne  and  personal  names.  Taking, 
then,  all  the  Sebekhoteps  and  Neferhoteps,  we  find  that  their  throne  names  fall 
also  into  three  groups,  obviously  closely  connected.  From  this  it  seems  evident 
that  we  have  to  do  here  with  one  complete  dynasty  scattered  among  the  names  of 
other  kings.  This  can  only  be  explained  by  the  hypothesis  that  the  Sebekhoteps 
belonged  to  a  dynasty  of  Upper  Egypt  contemporary  with  a  dynasty  reigning  in 
Lower  Egypt. 

Burchardt. — Die  Einnahme  von  Satuna  (2  plates).  This  is  a  little-known 
relief  of  an  event  in  the  reign  of  Rameses  II,  sculptured  on  a  wall  on  the  west  side 
of  the  temple  of  Luxor.  It  represents  the  fortress  of  Satuna,  standing  on  a  hill, 
which  appears  to  be  surrounded  by  a  forest  of  leafy  trees  and  cedars  ;  in  the  forest 
a  bear  attacks  a  fugitive  ;  the  king  and  his  army  are  shown  advancing  on  the 
citadel  in  the  usual  manner.  The  interest  of  the  scene  lies  in  the  fact  that,  though 
the  fortress  must  by  its  surroundings  have  been  in  Syria,  yet  its  defenders  are 
represented  as  Libyans,  wearing  the  Libyan  girdle,  side-lock,  and  feathers ;  and 
also  that  the  artist,  having  discovered  his  mistake,  has  attempted  to  rectify  it  by 
altering  the  hair  and  beards  into  the  Asiatic  form.  The  inscription  on  the  fortress 
has  also  been  altered,  but  the  original  signs  have  been  so  completely  destroyed 
that  it  is  impossible  even  to  guess  at  them.  An  unusual  point  in  this  sculpture  is 
the  introduction  of  low-growing  blossoming  plants  in  the  spaces  among  the  figures. 

Ember. — Kindred  Seinito-Egyptian  words.  A  list  of  a  hundred  Egyptian 
words  with  examples  of  kindred  words  in  allied  languages,  chiefly  Arabic  and 
Hebrew.     In  many  cases  a  short  discussion  is  added. 

Spiegelberg. — Die  allgeineine  Oris  und  Zeitbestimniung aim  Koptischen. 

The  sign  a,  originally  meaning  "  Hand  "  or  "  Arm,"  is  often  used  to  express 

time,  place,  or  condition.     This  use  passes  into  Coptic,  where  the  word  becomes  \. 

Thus:  AMT»ooT  "Mountain  district"  [HI.     The  Coptic  a,  which  means 

"About," /.If.,  an  uncertain  amount,  also  derives  from a;  in  this  use  it  is  often 

preceded  by  a  preposition,  d".^.,  MMAnMOTXfi  motiokio  "  About  a  stone's  throw." 
The  temporal  form  is  also  ma  ;  maotmot  cmto  "  About  two  hours  "  ;  in  this  form 
the  Sahidic  ma  becomes  mat  in  Boheiric.     The  third  use  is  best  exemplified  in 

the  expression  mauo,  "  In  a  condition  of  truth,"   ^\  "^  K  c^  '       '. 

Murray. —  The  cult  of  the  Drowned  in  Egypt.  The  cult  of  the  drowned  being 
known   throughout   the  world,   it   is   only  natural  to  look  for  it  in  Egypt.     It  is 


92  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptisclic  Sprache. 

a  form  of  water  worship,  and  is  therefore  found  in  some  of  the  cults  of  Osiris.  It 
seems  also  to  have  been  connected  with  the  sacrifice,  actual  or  vicarious,  of 
the  king. 

Mever. — Konig  Sesonchosis  als  Begriinder  der  Kriegerkaste  bet  Diodor.  The 
law-givers  of  Egypt,  according  to  Diodorus,  were  six  in  number :  Mnevis,  Sasuchis, 
Sesonchosis,  Bokchoris,  Amasis,  and  Darius  I.  The  first  two  are  legendary,  the 
last  three  are  well  known.  Sesonchosis  has  generally  been  identified  with  Scsostris, 
but  in  Manetho  ScCToiyY"*  (Africanus)  or  StaoyxoMns  (Eusebius)  is  the  form  used 
for  the  Egyptian  Sheshank. 


Miscellaneous. 

Spiegelberg. — A  correction  of  a  demotic  inscription  published  in  the  previous 
number.  The  inscription  should  begin,  "  Afterwards  it  happened  one  day  that 
Pharaoh  betook  himself  to  the  burial  vault  of  Apis." 

Spiegelberg. — The  Coptic  date-word  xcn-  is  derived  from  the  ancient 
^1  ®,  and  is  not  used  for  the  Indiction  ;  the  t  is  the  remains  of  the  word  ha-t. 

Ember. — Sethe  has  called  attention  to  secondary  stems  in  Egyptian  with 
prefixed  h.     These  are  paralleled  in  Mehri,  a  language  of  Southern  Arabia. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


(     92,     ) 


^  FLAXMAN   SPURRELL. 

1843-1915. 

The  notice  of  the  death  of  Flaxman  C.  J.  Spurrell  will  not  convey  much  to  the 
present  generation  of  workers  in  Egyptology ;  but  his  help  and  influence  had 
largely  to  do  with  the  wide  and  scientific  treatment  of  the  subject  in  England. 
Living  near  the  Crayford  pits,  he  was  devoted,  forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  to  the 
search  for  the  mammalia  in  the  brick  earths  there,  and  the  study  of  flint  implements. 
He  discovered  a  stratum  of  flints  left  in  the  course  of  working  on  an  old  land- 
surface,  and  succeeded  in  re-constituting  some  of  the  flakes  into  the  original  blocks. 
On  my  exhibiting  plans  of  ancient  earthworks  in  1876,  he  took  much  interest  in 
them,  and  began  a  close  friendship  which  led  him  to  give  his  time  largely  to  Egyptian 
matters  for  nearly  twenty  years.  In  the  work  of  the  unpacking  and  arranging 
collections,  in  studying  the  materials — especially  the  colours  and  gums — in  sorting 
and  drawing  flint  implements,  and  in  other  subjects,  he  was  indefatigable.  Some  of 
the  books  of  that  time  show  his  work  in  the  plates,  as  in  Kahttn,  Illahun,  and  Naqada, 
and  in  chapters  written  by  him  in  the  latter  two  books.  In  those  years,  before 
the  present  generation  of  workers  arose,  he  was  the  constant  helper  in  all  the 
scientific  questions  that  appeared,  as  well  as  in  the  hard  work  of  handling  the  tons 
of  materials  that  had  to  be  received  and  despatched  in  England. 

The  stimulating  manner  in  which  he  encouraged  research  could  hardly  be 
better  shown  than  by  a  letter  of  his,  dated  in  188 1.  In  that  he  wrote  :  "  I  do  not 
know  a  treatise  on  the  Geology  of  Egypt,  in  fact  it  is  very  uncertain,  but  it  appears 
to  me  that  the  study  of  the  evidences  of  a  rainy  time  in  connection  with  evidences 
of  man,  offers  a  splendid  chance  of  proving  the  antiquity  of  the  race.  There  must 
have  been  a  time  when  the  Nile  Valley  was  excavated  and  the  lateral  valleys 
poured  down  in  torrents  the  gravels  in  which  implements  have  been  found,  and 
through  which  tombs  have  been  cut.  While  this  was  going  on,  was  the  Nile 
depositing  the  present  style  of  mud?  If  not,  when  did  the  mud  begin,  and  were 
there  no  late  periods  of  detached  rainfall  which  might  have  overlapped  and 
ploughed  into  the  mud?  Is  the  drought  of  Egypt  increasing  now  or  not — I  mean, 
what  is  the  rainless  region  doing,  contracting  or  enlarging,  and  is  it  capable  of 
being  compared  with  the  mud  deposits  ?  I  do  not  know  if  there  are  records  of 
more  or  less  rain  in  ancient  inscriptions.  Is  it  possible  that  the  rainy  period 
coincided  with  our  later  glacial  times  ? — it  has  often  occurred  to  me  that  the  rainy 
period  in  Egypt  and  Morocco  was  our  glacial  period — the  showery,  or  intermediate 
period,  was  the  heavy  cold  rain  time  which  followed  our  glacial,  and  the  rainless 
time  of  Egypt  is  our  time  of  reduced  rivers  and  the  dry  valleys  of  to-day.  It 
seems  probable  that  the  pluvial  period  in  this  country  was  more  likely  to  destroy 
life  than  the  dry  glacial  cold — at  least  to  me.  Can  you  see  anything  worth 
examining  in  these  matters?" 

After  a  discussion  of  festooning  in  drift  strata,  and  the  confusion  of  black  and 
blue  in  early  colouring,  comes  a  postscript:  "Are  you  in  town  this  week?  If  you 
are  near  the  Brit.  Mus.  and  can  meet  me  for  an  hour  or  so,  I  will  join  you — but 
not  unless  you  have  occasion  to  be  there.     I  have  lots  of  questions. — F.  C.  J.  S." 


94  Flaxman  Spurrell. 

The  many  questions  raised  in  this  letter  are  not  answered  yet,  after  a  third  of 
a  century  ;  but  the  article  on  the  Stone  Age  in  Egypt  in  this  Journal  will  show 
that  a  little  has  been  done  toward  the  research  so  eagerly  sketched  out  long  ago. 
Personally,  Flaxman  Spurrell  had  a  beautiful  character.  Abhorring  all  underhand 
doings,  he  avoided  most  of  the  current  affairs  as  being  too  much  mixed  with 
cliques  and  wire-pulling.  He  was  fastidious  in  his  relations  to  men,  as  well  as  in 
his  methods  of  work.  Utterly  true  in  the  loyalty  of  his  friendships,  he  was  always 
ready  to  take  up  actively  any  piece  of  research  presented  to  him,  and  to  follow  it 
unsparingly.  It  was  most  regrettable  that  he  could  not  be  persuaded  to  go  to 
Egypt,  and  work  with  the  stimulus  of  fresh  material  around  him.  But,  as  time 
passed,  the  pessimism  which  appeared  in  an  assumption  of  cynicism  over  the 
intense  kindness  of  his  nature,  grew  into  a  melancholy  tone.  The  entreaties  of  his 
friends  would  not  lead  him  out,  and  for  the  last  twenty  years  he  seldom  came  from 
his  retirement  in  Norfolk.  Once  and  again  in  a  few  j-ears  he  would  suddenly 
appear  for  an  hour  or  two,  in  a  way  tantalizing  to  those  who  remembered  the  keen 
interests  of  the  past  which  he  could  no  longer  be  induced  to  continue. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(     95     ) 


NOTES   AND   NEWS. 


Owing  to  the  exigencies  of  the  war,  our  workers  are  scattered  in  various  directions. 
Mr.  Guy  Brunton  is  still  in  Red  Cross  work  at  Netley  Hospital,  acting  as  pay- 
sergeant  there.     Mrs.  Guy  Brunton  has  been  in  Hospital  work  on  the  East  Coast. 

Mr.  Engelbach  has  returned  from  the  front,  where  he  was  despatch  riding,  and 
is  Lieutenant  in  the  Royal  Engineers,  in  training  at  Sheerness. 

Dr.  Walter  Amsden  is  medical  officer  at  Cooden  Beach  Camp,  very  closely 
occupied  with  inoculation  and  testing  work. 

Mr.  H.  Thompson  (in  O-xford  and  Bucks  L.  Infantry)  is  digging  trenches  on 
the  East  Coast,  and  came  upon  an  ancient  grave  with  Roman  pottery. 

Mr.  G.  R.  North  is  now  Lieutenant  in  9th  Batt.  Queen's  R.  West  Surrey  Regt., 
digging  trenches  in  Kent. 

Miss  D.  K.  Allan  has  been  working  on  V.A.D.,  and  joined  the  Scottish 
Women's  Hospital  at  Asnieres,  as  kitchen  orderly ;  she  is  now  in  a  ward  at  the 
Abbaye  de  Royaumont,  nursing  French  and  Turcos. 

Miss  Ruth  Fry  went  to  France  as  Secretary  of  the  Friends'  league  for  the 
protection  of  war  victims,  and  is  now  returned. 

Mr.  Philip  Button  has  been  at  the  front  from  the  first,  and  is  now  Captain  in 
the  2nd  R.  Warwickshire  Regt. 


With  the  greatest  regret  we  hear  of  the  loss  that  Prof.  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  has 
suffered  in  the  death  of  his  son,  M.  Jacques  Jean  Gaston  Maspero,  who  fell  at  the 
head  of  his  division  in  the  attack  on  Vauquois  in  the  Argonne,  on  i8th  February. 
M.  Jean  Maspero  was  known  by  his  work  on  Greek  inscriptions,  and  we  shall  all 
grieve  at  the  loss  of  a  scholar,  and  at  such  a  blow  to  one  of  the  leaders  in 
Egyptology,  to  whom  all  will  render  their  sincere  sympathy. 


Collection  by  THE  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt  for  the 

Officers'  Families  Fund. 

In  December,  I  undertook  to  collect  donations  for  the  above-named  war 
relief  fund,  from  the  annual  subscribers  of  the  British  School.  The  correspondence 
has  brought  much  satisfaction  to  us,  so  great  has  been  the  interest  and  the 
enthusiasm  .shown  ;  except  for  one  dissentient  the  subscribers  have  been  unanimous 
in  their  approval,  and  have  given  hearty  support  to  this  cause.  In  the  first  month, 
nearly  ;^230  reached  me,  in  response  to  the  appeal,  shortly  followed  by  another 
;^iOO.  During  January,  yet  another  ;^ioo  came  in;  about  .^50  more  up  to  the 
present  time  (15  March)  makes  a  total  of  ^^'486  iSs. 

The  Officers'  Families  Fund  was  established  in  1899,  and  worked  all  through 
the  South  African  War  under  e.xperienced  management.  The  Treasurer  is 
Lord  Milner,  and  the  headquarters  is  at  Lansdowne  House. 

Any  contributions  marked  O.F.F.,  and  sent  to  me  at  University  College, 
Gower  St.,  London,  will  be  thankfully  received,  and  acknowledged  instantly  by 
receipt,  and  will  also  be  acknowledged  in  the  Times  and  Morning  Post  on  the 
first  Thursday  of  the  following  month. 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


(     96    ) 


THE  EGYPTIAN  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

Some  of  the  branches  have  bravely  maintained  their  activity.  Others  have 
flagged,  but  we  hope  that  these  will  revive  with  the  spring.  It  is  still  not  too  late 
to  conduct  a  season's  meetings,  and  the  duty  of  keeping  up  former  intellectual 
interests  is  more  than  ever  felt  by  everyone.  One  or  two  of  the  branches  mean 
to  extend  their  meetings  late  into  the  summer. 

London.  (Hon.  Sec,  Mrs.  Sefton-Jones,  permanent  address,  74,  Cadogan 
Place,  S.W.) — Meetings,  monthly ;  at  8  p.m.  tea  and  coffee,  8.30  p.m.  lecture. 
Dec.  10,  at  Mrs.  P.  Bigland's,  an  impromptu  lecture  kindly  given  by  Mr.  Sefton- 
Jones,  on  "  The  Bogomils."  Jan.  29,  Egyptian  play,  by  Mrs.  Purdon.  Feb.  25, 
Mrs.  Lewis,  D.D.,  on  "The  Sinai  Gospels."  March  17,  Miss  M.  A.  Murray,  on 
"  Osiris."     April  and  May  meetings  not  yet  announced. 

Gla.SGO\V.  {Pro  tem..  Rev.  A.  C.  Baird,  B.D.,  14,  Royal  Terrace.) — At  the 
University,  Dec.  7,  8.30  p.m..  Prof  Milligan,  on  "  A  thousand  years  on  the  Nile." 
Feb.  15,  8.30  p.m..  Prof  Gregory,  on  "  History  of  the  Climate  of  Egypt." 

Hastings.  (Mrs.  Russell  Morris,  Quarry  Hill  Lodge,  St.  Leonards.) — Oct.  17, 
Major  Davenport,  on  "  Ancient  Egyptian  Jewellery."  Nov.  30,  Dr.  Spanton,  on 
"Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt."  Jan.  i,  Mrs.  Court,  on  "Sign  Language." 
Feb.  17,  at  the  Public  Museum,  Mr.  Thos.  Wright,  on  "The  Fascination  of  Old 
Egypt."     In  April,  lecture  on  Prehistoric  Pottery.     In  June,  garden  (?)  meeting. 

Ross-on-Wye.  (Mrs.  Marshall,  Gayton  Hall.) — Third  meeting,  Dec.  30 
(Mrs.  Cobbold),  lecture  on  "  Ptolemaic  Period."  Jan.  20  (Mrs.  Cobbold),  lecture  on 
"  Graeco-Roman  Period."  Mar.  3  (Mrs.  Schomberg),  lecture  on  "  Analogy  of 
African  tribal  customs  to  those  of  Ancient  Egypt."  A  small  lending  library  on 
Egyptian  and  Ancient  History,  free  for  members'  use,  is  established  in  Ross. 


Manchester.  Egyptian  and  Oriental  Society.  (Miss  W.  M.  Crompton, 
the  University.) — Monthly,  8  p.m.,  at  the  University.  Oct.  5  (1914),  Annual 
Meeting,  when  Prof  J.  H.  Moulton,  D.D.,  was  elected  President,  in  place  of 
Prof  Rhys  David.s,  retiring;  Prof  Flinders  Petrie,  on  "The  Metals  in  Ancient 
Egypt."  Oct.  31,  Principal  Burrows,  on  "Recent  Excavations  in  Crete."  Dec.  i, 
Rev.  D.  P.  Buckle,  on  "The  Book  of  Wisdom.'  Jan.  15,  Miss  M.  A.  Murray,  on 
"Ancient  Egyptian  Literature  and  Legends."  Feb.  17,  Prof  Elliot  Smith,  on 
"Oriental  Temples  and  Mummie.s."  Mar.  19  (5  p.m.).  Principal  Bennett,  D.D.,  on 
"Archaeology  and  Criticism." 

Hilda  Flinders  Petrie. 


For  the  description  of  the  Portraits  see  the  first  article  by  Prof  Gardner,  on 
the  supreme  figure  of  Cretan  art  which  we  arc  permitted  to  publish  by  the 
authorities  of  the  Boston  Museum. 


4 


t 


IVORY  AND   GOI.D  CRETAN    STATUETTE,    BOSTON    MUSEUM, 


V 


^b 


IVORY  AND   GOLD   CRETAN    STATUETTE,   BOSTON    MUSEUM. 


Fig.  4.    Libyans  of  Bakt. 
Shewing  identity  of  Male  and  Female  Dress. 

{From  Bonbardts  Grahdtulmial  des  Kdnigs  Sahii-re.) 


c^ 


ANCIENT   EGYPT. 


TA    TE//EN (7— "OLIVE   LAND." 

No  interpretation  of  the  geographical  name  '^^^^  |   ^  ■  Ea   Tehenu,  has  yet  been 

given.  Egyptologists  usually  understand  the  word  to  mean  "  Libya,"  but  although 
this  meaning  is  undoubtedly  correct,  it  is  not  a  translation  of  the  name.  Countries 
were  often  named  by  the  Egyptians,  as  by  other  peoples,  after  the  chief  product  of 

the   land.     They   called    Lower    Egypt     "'    w" ,    Ta-meh,   "  Flax-land " ;    Middle 

Egypt,  ^^"^  -^  ,   Ta  shema,  "  Reed-land  "  ;  Syria  (in  early  times)    ]  ,    Ta-neter, 

"  Neter-\3ind"  i.e.,  the  land  of  the  «^/^r-pole  ;  and  Nubia,  ===  | ,  Ta-pedt,  "  Bow-land," 

because  the  bow  was  the  principal  weapon  of  the  inhabitants.  =^^^  |  O  , 
Ta  Tehenu,  is,  of  course,  "  7V/r«i«-land,"  but  the  question  to  be  answered  is.  What  is 
I  _0  ,  Tehenu  ? 

One  of  the  most  important  products  of  ^^^^  |    O    was  an  oil  which  is  named 

in  Old  Kingdom  lists  of  offerings  —^  1 ,  ^   •  h^^i^t  tehenu,  "  Tchenu-oW."     Some- 

times  this  oil  is  named   -^^  1    O    ,  hdtet  nt   Tehenu,  "  Oil   of  Tehenu"  and 

often,  in  later  lists,  the  r-r\-r\  determinative  is  added  showing  that  the  Egyptians 

recognised  the  oil  as  a  product  of  Tehenu-Xdind.      — =^  ===  |    0    ,  "  Oil  of 

TehenuAsind"  it  should  be  remarked,  is  never  found.  Generally  mentioned  with 
Tehenu-oW  is    -^^  C\,  hdtet  ash,  "  Cedar-oil,"  and  this  name  is  also  often  written 

^    oOED  "^     ■  — ' 

-=^  " O.  ^icitet  nt  ash,  "Oil   of  Cedar."     It   is  therefore  probable  that  if 

-=® O  is  "  Cedar-oil,"  -^  \    O     means  "  Tehnm-oW  "  and  not  as  it  is  usually 


translated  "  Libyan  oil."     What  then  is  Teheuu-oil  ? 

On  some  1st  dynasty  labels  for  oil  jars  found  by  Prof  Petrie  at  Abydos  this 
oil  is  named  |    0    _^,^  and  the  tree  branch  determinative  >.3-^  of  the  word  shows 

that  it  was  the  produce  of  a  tree.     If  we  can  identify  this  ^    O  -tree,-  then  we  have 

the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  country,  =^=??=  |    O    .     What  was  this   |    O  -tree  ? 

On  an  Archaic  Slate  Palette  in  the  Cairo  Museum  (Cat.  Gen.  No.  14238)  there 
is  sculptured  a  scene  in  relief  depicting  some  domesticated  animals,  and  below  is 


98  Ta  Te/ienu—"  Olive  Land." 

represented  a  plantation  of  trees  (see  Fig.  i).     These  trees  have  thick  trunks  and 

branches.     On  the  right-hand  side  of  this  plantation  is  the  sign  |,  which  is  certainly 

the  name  of  the  tree.     One  of  the  readings  of  this  Vsign  is  tehemi.     The  sign  itself 

represents  a  club  (see  Fig.  2)  and  when  it  is  found  in  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  with 
coloured  detail  it  is  sometimes  painted  yellow  with  black  cloudy  graining  {Beni 
Hasan,  III,  PL  V).  We  have  therefore  four  facts  to  guide  us  in  the  identification 
of  the  tree.  First,  it  was  a  tree  of  sturdy  growth  with  thick  trunk  and  branches. 
Second,  the  word-sign  for  its  name  is  a  club,  from  which  we  may  presume  that  its 
wood  was  used  for  making  clubs,  and  consequently  tough  and  hard.  Third,  its  wood 
was  yellowish  with  black,  cloudy  graining.  Fourth,  it  was  an  oil-producing  tree. 
Now  there  is  only  one  Egyptian  tree  that  will  answer  to  the  above  description  and 
to  the  figure  as  shown  on  the  Archaic  Slate  Palette.  This  is  the  olive-tree  which, 
as  is  well  known,  is  of  sturdy  thickset  growth,  has  yellowish  wood  with  cloudy 
graining,  produces  a  valuable  oil,  and  its  wood  was  used  in  antiquity  for  the 
manufacture  of  clubs.'     Hence  we  may,  I  think  safely,  translate  the  geographical 

name  =?^  1    ^   ," Olive-land." 


Fig.   I.     Olive  Trees  and  Cattle  on  Slate  Palette. 

There  is  one  other  fact  which  points  to  the  identification  of  the  t_ekenti-tre&  with 
the  olive.     The  common  name  of  the  olive  tree  in  Egyptian  texts  is    1   i<^^        ^-^A^ 

baqt,  and  for  olive  oil     1  ^^,  ^^  A  *-=^  O  .     In  lists  of  offerings,  however,  this 

name  is  found  only  twice  and  these  two  instances  are  very  significant.     In  the 
tombs  of  Rahotep   and  Nefert  at   Medum''   we   have   a   list   of  sacred   oils,  and 

^  ^  (Rahotep),  ^  ^  (Nefert),  and  ^  ^  f  ^  "^  1"  (Rahotep) 
g  Q  (Nefert),  are  mentioned  together.  The  first  is  and  nt  a,  "  oil  of  a,"  the 
second  is. and  nt  baqt,  "oil  of  olive,"  and  these  two  names  take  the  place  of  the 
-=^  """^ °  O   and  the  -=^  ""^^  1    0     of  other  and  later  lists. 

It  has  been  remarked  that  Ta  Tehenu  (which  we  may  now  call  "  Olive-land") 
is  usually  understood  to  mean  Libya,  but  Libya  is  a  vague  term.  By  some  classical 
writers  Libya  was  understood  to  mean  the  whole  of  Africa  west  of  the  Isthmus  of 
Suez,  by  others,  all  the   country   to   the   west   of  Egypt   including   the   Oases.^ 


Ta   Tehenu — "  Olive  Land!' 


99 


Egyptologists  generally  hold  to  the  latter  definition,  but  there  is  evidence  to  show 
that  in  early  times,  at  all  events,  Olive-land  included  the  Mareotis  lake  region 
and  all  the  country  to  the  west  of  the  Canopic  branch  of  the  Nile,  possibly  also 
tnuch  of  the  Delta  itself.  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  Olive-land  was 
a  very  rich  and  prosperous  country.  King  Sahure  of  the  Vth  dynasty  captured 
from  its  peopfe  no  less  than  123,440  oxen,  233,400  asses,  232,413  goats,  and 
243,688  sheep.''  This  immense  number  of  large  and  small  cattle  is  evidence 
that  Olive-land  must  have  included  within  its  boundaries  very  extensive  grass-lands. 
Several  centuries  earlier  than  Sahure,  Narmer-Menes  conquered  the  people  of  Olive- 
land.  This  conquest  is  recorded  on  a  small  ivory  cylinder  (Fig.  3)  found  at 
Hierakonpolis,"  and  it  confirms  the  statement  of  Manetho^  that  the  founder  of  the 
Egyptian  monarchy  undertook  an  expedition  against  the  Libyans.  Another  record 
of  the  same  e.xpedition  is  the  famous  Slate  Palette  of  Narmer-Menes  which  shows 
the  Upper  Egyptian  Falcon-king  smiting  the  Chieftain  of  the  Harpoon  Lake 
(Mareotis),  and  on  the  verso  is  the  scene  of  a  festival  at  the  Great  Port  which,  as 
I  have  shown  elsewhere,  was  probably  situated  near  the  mouth  of  the  Canopic 
branch  of  the  Nile.^ 


'//, "'.  I 


Fig.  2.     Throw-stick, 
OR  Angulated  Club. 


Fig.  3.     Cylinder  of  Nar-mer 
Conquering  the  Taijenu. 
(Fig.  \,  see  Frontispiece.) 


The  Libyan  people  were  called  W\  O  ^  ^ .  and  Prof.  Maspero  has  shown  i" 

that  this  ethnic  name  was  often  used  synonymously  with  \  ^|\  9  v\  ^  ^il  that  the 
one  name  could  in  fact  be  used  for  the  other.  The  full  significance  of  this  has  not 
yet  been  recognised.     The  Northern  Delta  was  called  o<=.<  Y,  Ta-vieli,"  Flax-land," 

and  the  people  of  this  "Flax-land"  were  apparently  known  as  \  ^^  |   y- f"*" 
variantof  the  name  of  a  queen"  of  the  Early  XVI II  th  dynasty  f      |    R       "^ 

Aalpnes  Hent  ta-meli, "  Ahmose,  Mistress  of  Flax-land,"  is  i  ^^  ^  l  ^\     8  %  1   ] 

Aalcmes  Hent-temehu,  "  Ahmose,  Mistress  of  the  Tevie{iu-peop\e."  The  centre  of  the 
flax-weaving  industry  in  Egypt  was  Sais  in  the  Western  Delta,  and  this  city  appears 
to  have  been  the  capital  of  "Flax-land"  at  the  time  immediately  preceding  the 
1st  dynasty.     Neith  of  Sais  has  generally  been  recognised  as  a  Libyan  goddess  ; 

the  people  of  Sais  were  undoubtedly  Libyan  in  origin  ;  at  Sais  was  the  \\^  \ , 


:j 


"  Temple  of  the  Bee  (or  Hornet)" ;  and  the  title  of  the  kings  of 


oo,^ 


"  Flax-land," 


was   !^ ,  bati,  which,  as  Prof.  Petrie  has  pointed  out  {Royal  Tombs,  1,  p.  36),  was 

very  probably  the  Libyan   royal   title.      The  kings   of  Egypt   mentioned   on  the 

G  2 


100  Ta   Telienu — "  Olive  Lancf'' 

Palermo  Stone  are  figured  as  wearing  the  V -crown  of  Neith,  and  it  was  by  his 

marriage  with  Hetep,  the  chieftainess  of  Sais,  that  Narmer-Menes  united  the  two 
kingdoms  of  Egypt  under  his  sole  authoritj'.'-  The  kingdom  which  Narmer-Menes 
conquered  was  therefore  the  Libyan  kingdom  of  Lower  Egypt. 


Notes. 

1  See  my  paper  on  "  The  Wooden  and  Ivory  Labels  of  the  First  Dynasty/'  in 
the  Proceediftgs  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  1912,  pp.  288. 

^  Although  we  find  no  direct  mention  of  this  le/ieim-trec  in  later  texts  it 
is   interesting   to   note   that  we   have  a   reminiscence   of  the   name  in  the  word 

n  II  ^         ^    ^°""'^  '"  ^'""^  "  Papyrus  Harris,"  VIII,  4. 

^  Beyond  the  fact  that  the  word-sign  for  the  name  of  this  oil-producing  tree  is 
a  club,  we  have  as  yet  no  other  Egyptian  evidence  on  this  point,  but  it  is  worth 
noting  that  Theocritus  mentions  that  the  Cyclop's  club  was  of  olive  wood,  and 
Pausanias  (ii,  31,  10)  remarks  that  it  was  from  the  club  of  Hercules  that  the  wild 
olive  sprang.  Classical  writers  also  mention  that  olive  wood  was  the  favourite  wood 
for  making  the  handles  of  axes  and  tools  and  in  this  connection  note  the  colouring 
of  the  adze-sign  figured  in  Beni  Hasan,  III,  PL  V,  No.  73. 
*  Petrie,  Meduin,  Pis.  XIII  and  XV. 

•'  Herodotus,  for  instance,  understood  by  the  name  Libya  sometimes  the  whole 
of  ancient  Africa  (IV,  42),  sometimes  Africa  exclusive  of  Egypt  (II,  17,  18; 
IV,  167). 

"  See  L.  Borchardt,  Das  Grabdenkmal  des  Konigs  Sahu-re,  Band  II,  Bl.  i. 
It  is  interesting  to  compare  that  plate  with  the  scene  on  the  fragment  of  the 
Slate  Palette  shown  in  Fig.  i.  The  Slate  Palette  very  probably  recorded  an  early 
king's  captures  in  Olive-land. 

7  See  Hierakonpolis,  I,  PI.  XV. 

•*  Muller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicum  Grace,  II,  pp.  539,  540. 
^  Liverpool  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology,  I,  pp.  20,  21. 
^"  Maspero,  Sinouhit,  p.  XXX,  2. 

^'  Maspero  thought  these  names  indicated  two  different  princesses,  but  Daressy 
has  shown  in  the  Aimales  du  Service,  IX,  pp.  95,  96,  that  they  refer  to  one  and 
the  same  princess. 

^^  See  my  paper  "To  what  Race  did  the  Founders  of  Sais  belong?"  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  1906,  pp.  68-70. 


Ta   Telicnu — "  Olive  Land" 


lOi 


The  Mother  of  Hatshepsut. 

[n  the  preceding  paper  I  have  mentioned  a  queen  named  Ahmose  Hent-ta-meh 
and  Ahmose  Hent-temehu.     Her  name  is  written  variously  : — 


Les  Moinies  royales.p.  543. 

^^'^ySi^lkl^l-  (*<'-. p- 544.) 
^■l¥lg]kl^ll-  (""^■■'■544.) 

\  ^^^I'^fT^]  '^  I  ^  i  J  ■  (^^■"'^^^y-  ^'"'-  ^"'^■^  ^^'  p-  95-) 

T  ^  ^^   I      fH  ^  V    I  ■     Lepsius,  Denkmiiler,  iii,  8  a. 

I      <=>    (    fi  1[   I  ■     Lepsius,  Dc7ikuialc7;  m,  2  a  {d.  d). 


Fig.  5.     Queen  Ahmose,  Deir  el-Bahki. 
( From  a  Painting  by  Mr.  Howard  Carter. ) 

From  No.  2  it  will  be  observed  that  Ahmose  was  this  princess's  principal 
name,  and  that  she  was  ^]|  "  called  "  Hent-temehu,  the  latter  name  was,  there- 
fore, a  secondary  one.  Now  we  cannot  believe  that  this  secondary  name, 
which  means  "  Mistress  of  the  Temehu,"  was  meaningless.  She  must  certainly 
have  had  some  connection  with  the  Temehu  people  of  the  North,  and  this 
connection   was   probably   through   her   mother   Anhapi,    who    is  described  as  a 

Ci  3 


I02  Ta   Telienii — "  Olive  Land." 

King's  Daughter,  but  whose  parentage  we  do  not  know.  The  titles  given  above 
show  that  this  Ahmose  was  a  Kings-Daughter,  a  King's-Sister,  a  King's-VVife, 
and  a  Great  King's-Wife.  All  the  evidence  regarding  her  goes  to  show  that 
she  was  a  daughter  of  King  Ahmose  I,  and  this  point  has  been  granted  by  all 
Egyptologists.  Now  if  she  was  a  King's-Daughter  in  virtue  of  her  being  a 
child  of  Ahmose  I,  she  was,  therefore,  a  King's-Sister  in  virtue  of  her  being  a 
[half-]sister  of  Amenhetep  I.  But  the  question  arises,  Was  she  the  latter  king's 
wife  ?  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  she  was.  On  the  other  hand  the 
successor  of  Amenhetep  I  was  Thothmes  I,  and  his  claim  to  the  throne  of  Egypt 
was  made  good  by  his  marriage  to  a  Princess  Ahmose.  This  Princess  Ahmose 
is  usually  taken  to  be  a  daughter  of  Amenhetep  I,  but  there  is  no  evidence  what- 
ever for  this  assumption.  The  queen  of  Thothmes  I  was  famous  as  the  mother 
of  HatshepsQt,  and  she  is  described  on  the  walls  of  the  Deir  el-Bahri  temple  as 

1|^  "King's-Sister,"  1^^  "Great   King's  Wife,"  1^  "  King's-Mother." 

The  King's-Sister  title  would  refer  to  her  being  [half-]sister  to  Amenhetep  I, 
Great  King's-Wife  to  her  being  queen  of  Thothmes  I,  and  King's-Mother  to  her 


being   mother  of  Hatshepsut.      She  was  also  onQ<:=>    "Great  Heiress,"   and 

it  was  in  virtue  of  this  latter  position  that  her  husband  made  valid  his  claim  to 
the  throne.  Now  as  we  have  no  evidence  of  a  daughter  of  Amenhetep  I  being 
named  Ahmose,  and  as  we  know  of  a  daughter  of  King  Ahmose  I  bearing  the 
name,  and  that  this  daughter  was  also  a  Great  King's-Wife,  I  suggest  that  the 
celebrated  Queen  Ahmose,  the  mother  of  Hatshepsut,  was  really  the  Ahmose, 
daughter  of  King  Ahmose  I,  who  was  called  "  Mistress  of  the  Temehu."  A  fact 
that  lends  colour  to  this  theory  is  that  her  daughter,  Hatshepsut,  clothed  herself  in 
male  attire,  which  seems  to  have  been  a  custom  with  Libyan  chieftainesses.  It 
is  true  that  we  know  very  little  about  the  Libyan  people  as  yet,  but  it  is  remarkable 
that  on  the  Sahure  Reliefs  (see  Fig.  4)  the  Chiefs'  women  are  clothed  in  male 
dress :  and  a  tile  from  Medinet  Habu  shows  a  Libyan  woman  wearing  the 
regular  male  kilt  and  robe  (see  Oric  Bates,  The  Eastern  Libyans,  p.  113). 
Perhaps  Hatshepsiit,  when  she  adopted  male  attire,  was  only  following  in  the 
footsteps  of  her  mother's  ancestors. 

Percy  E.  Newberry. 


(     I03     ) 


I^MULTIPLE   SOULS    IN    NEGRO   AFRICA. 

To  the  twenty-three  headings  connected  with  death  and  burial  under  which 
Prof.  Petrie  discusses  the  relation  of  Egypt  to  Africa  (Egypt  in  Africa,  ANCIENT 
Egvpt,  1914,  III  and  IV),  I  should  like  to  add  yet  one  other,  viz.,  the  belief  that 
the  individual  is  constituted  of  a  number  of  incorporeal  elements,  one  of  which  is 
usually  the  "  double."  For  brevity  I  propose  to  call  this  the  doctrine  of  "  multiple 
souls."  Its  existence  in  ancient  Egypt  is  so  well  authenticated  that  I  shall  make 
no  further  reference  to  this  ;  but  it  is  less  commonly  recognised  that  it  is  held  in 
Africa  at  the  present  day. 

I  do  not  suggest  that  the  following  examples  constitute  even  a  moderately 
complete  list  of  the  instances  already  recorded  :  I  only  give  some  of  the  more 
striking  examples.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  literature  from  which  these  are 
taken  is  quite  recent,  no  doubt  because  it  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  an 
interest  has  been  taken  in  the  subject,  but  going  a  little  further  back.  Colonel  Ellis' 
works  suggest  that  the  belief  exists  among  the  tribes  of  the  Guinea  Coast,  although 
full  details  are  not  given. 

The  following  account  is  taken  from  the  latest  of  Ellis'  volumes  : — ^ 

"  The  Tshi-speaking  people  believe  that  every  man  has  dwelling  in  him  a  spirit 
termed  a  kra,  which  enters  him  at  birth  and  quits  him  at  death,  and  is  entirely 
distinct  from  the  soul,  which,  at  the  death  of  the  body,  proceeds  to  the  Land  of  the 

Dead,  and  there  continues  the  life  formerly  led  by  the  man  in  the  world 

The  Ewe-speaking  peoples  have  a  similar  belief,  the  indwelling  spirit  being  by  them 
termed  a  luioo.     The  Ga-speaking  tribes,  situated  geographically  between  the  Tshi 

and  Ewe  tribes assign  to  each  individual  two  indwelling  spirits,  called  kla, 

one  male  and   one   female,  the  former  being  of  a  bad  and  the  latter  of  a  good 

disposition.     Each  kla,  like  the  kra  and  the  luwo,  is  a  guardian-spirit,  but 

they  give  good  and  bad  advice,  and  prompt  good  or  bad  actions,  according  to 

their  respective  dispositions.     The  Yorubas hold   that   each   man   has 

three  spiritual  inmates,  the  first  of  whom,  Olori,  dwells  in  the  head,  the  second, 
Ipin  ij'eun,  in  the  stomach,  and  the  third,  Ipori,  in  the  great  toe. 

"  Olori  .  .  .  . ,  sometimes  called  Ori  (head,  faculty,  talent),  seems  to  be  the 
spirit  which  answers  to  the  kra  or  luioo.  Me  is  the  protector,  guardian  and  guide. 
Offerings  are  made  to  him,  chiefly  fowls,  as  with  the  kra  and  luwo,  and  some 
of  the  blood,  mixed  with  palm-oil,  is  rubbed  upon  the  forehead.  Olori  brings 
good-fortune 

" Ipin  ij'emt,  or  ipin ojehun, 'he  who  shares  the  food,'  is  perhaps  considered 

the  most  important  of  the  three  indwelling  spirits,  but  as  he  shares  in  all  that  the 
man  eats,  he  has  no  special  sacrifice  offered  to  him 

"  Ipori,  [in]  the  great  toe,  is  the  least  important  of  the  three  guardian  spirits, 
and  sacrifice  is  rarely  offered  to  him,  except  when  a  man  is  about  to  set  out  on  a 
journey,  in  which  case  he  anoints  the  great  toe  with  a  mixture  of  fowl's  blood  and 
palm-oil 

"The  ghost-man,  or  soul,  the  'vehicle  of  individual  personal  existence,'  is 
called  iwin,  or  okan,  but  the  latter  also  means  '  heart.'     Another  word  is  ojiji,  or 

'   The  Yoruba-Speaking  Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coast  of  West  Africa  (1894),  pp.  l^i,sqq. 

G  4 


104  Multiple  Souls  in  Negi-o  Africa. 

oji,  which  has  the  meanings  of  ghost,  shade,  or  shadow.  After  the  death  of  the 
body,  the  ghost-man  goes  to  Ipo-oku,  '  the  Land  of  the  Dead  '  (i/>o,  place  ;  oi'u, 
dead),  which  is  beneath  the  earth,  and  where  each  man  does  that  which  he  has 
been  accustomed  to  do,  and  holds  the  same  social  position  as  he  did  in  the  world. 
To  enable  the  ghost  to  reach  this  land  it  is  essential  that  he  should  have  the 
prescribed  funeral  rites  performed  over  him.  Should  they  be  omitted,  the  ghost 
wanders  about  the  world,  cold,  hungry,  and  homeless,  and  he  runs  the  risk  of 
being  seized  by  some  of  the  evil  spirits  which  roam  about  the  earth  in  great 
numbers,  and  cast  by  them  into  Ortin-apadi,  'the  unseen  world  of  potsherds,'  an 
uncomfortable  place  like  a  pottery  furnace,  heaped  up  with  charcoal  and  the 
debris  of  broken  earthen  pots." 

To  the  north,  among  the  Hausa  of  Nigeria,  somewhat  similar  beliefs  prevail, 
complicated,  however,  by  Arab  influence.  Major  Tremearne's  account  shows  that 
the  visible  body  contains  "the  soul,"  kuruwa,  distinct  from  the  "shadow,"  enmiwa, 
and  the  "life,"  rai,  "  the  former  being  situated  in  the  heart,  the  latter  wandering  at  will 
all  over  the  body."     In  addition  there  is  "  the  familiar,  bori,  of  the  same  sex,  a  kind 

of  second  soul, it  acts  as  an  intermediary  between  its  human  host  and 

the  denizens  of  the  jinn  country."  This  dori  "  is  like  the  being  to  which  it  belongs, 
but  it  is  outside  him,  and  casts  no  shadow,  and  it  is  really  a  double.  ...  It  .  .  . 
wanders  when  the  owner  sleeps  .  .  .  though  it  does  not  necessarily  go  in  company 
with  the  soul,  ....  Its  duty  is  to  protect  the  being  from  injury  by  another  bori, 
and  '  if  it  is  stronger  than  the  enemy,  all  you  will  know  is  that  you  feel  tired  on 
account  of  the  struggle ;  but  if  weaker,  it  will  be  worsted,  and  you  will  become 
ill.'"^  Moreover,  "from  about  puberty  until  marriage,  most  Hausas  have  another 
bori,  but  of  the  opposite  sex,  with  which  they  have  relations,  and  when  a  boy  or 
girl  thinks  of  marriage  he  or  she  must  consult  his  or  her  female  or  male  bori,  for  it 

does  not  like  being  ousted  by  a  human  rival Lastly,  there  are  two  angels, 

one  hovering  above  the  right  shoulder,  the  other  over  the  left,  which  record  the  good 
and  evil  thoughts  of  the  person  to  whom  they  are  attached."  - 

The  doctrine  of  multiple  souls  is  widely  spread  in  the  Congo  area.  Mr.  R.  E. 
Dennett  gives  the  following  account  of  the  beliefs  of  the  Bavili,  a  Bantu-speaking 
tribe  of  Luango,  the  northern  portion  of  the  Congo  coast  district.  They  hold  that 
man  consists  of  the  following  elements  : — - 

The  xiinbindi,  or  "  revenant,"  a  visible  element  which  stays  in  the  house  after 
death,  and  then  lives  in  the  forest. 

T\ie  xidundu,  "shadow,"  which  sleeps  in  the  body  of  its  owner;  it  enters  and 
leaves  the  body  by  the  mouth,  and  is  likened  to  the  breath  {inuvti)  of  man.  When 
a  man  swoons  it  is  because  a  sorcerer  has  taken  his  xidiindu. 

The  nkulu,  "  soul,"  the  "  guiding  voice  of  the  dead."  The  nkulu  prefers  to 
dwell  in  the  head  of  a  near  relative.  It  seems  that  a  iikulu  may  be  present  in  the 
earth  taken  from  a  grave,  and  it  is  the  bakulu  of  ancestors  that  cause  women  to 
bear  children  and  babies  to  sicken. 

The  xilunzi,  also  called  ndunsi,  the  "  intelligence,"  dies  with  man.'' 
It  seems  probable  that  the  xidiindu  is  a  "double,"  but  it  is  not  always  easy 
to  be  sure  of  Mr.  Dennett's  meaning. 

Among  the  tribes,  as  far  as  we  know  them,  inhabiting  the  area  drained  by  the 
southern  affluents  of  the   Congo,   the   problem   presented    by   man's   nature   has 

'  A.  J.  N.  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  noH  {\()\^),  pp.  19,  136,  137. 

■^  A.  J.  N.  Tremearne,  op.  cit.,  p.  19. 

'  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man's  Mind  {\<)ob),  pp.  79-82. 


Multiple  Sojils  in  Negro  Africa.  105 

resulted  in  the  recognition  of  at  least  two  immaterial  parts.  Of  these,  one,  which 
does  not  leave  the  body  during  life,  is  usually  connected  with  one  of  the  vital 
organs,  e.g.,  with  the  heart,  mityima,  by  the  northern  Bambala,  and  with  the  liver, 
vCtim,  by  the  Babunda.  Another  element  is  described  as  a  sort  of  double  which 
may  leave  a  man  when  asleep,  may  visit  his  friends  and  have  all  manner  of 
adventures.  ^loreover,  there  is  frequently  confusion  between  the  spiritual  mityima 
or  m'tiin  and  the  viscus  which  bears  the  same  name  ;  thus,  one  of  Mr.  Torday's 
informants  argued  that  it  could  not  be  true  that  a  man's  m'tim  went  away  when 
he  died,  "  have  dead  goats  and  chickens  no  livers  ?  "  For  this  information — hitherto 
unpublished — I  am  indebted  to  Messrs.  Torday  and  Joyce  from  whose  writings 
the  following  example  is  taken  : — 

The  Bahuana,  inhabiting  the  banks  of  the  Kwilu,  an  affluent  of  the  Kasai 
which  itself  enters  the  Congo,  say  that  three  elements  enter  into  the  composition 
of  man;  the  body,  the  "soul"  called  bun,  and  the  "double"  called  doslii.  The 
word  bun  also  means  "  heart." 

"  The  bun  of  a  dead  man can  appear  to  other  men ;  the 

bun  is  seen  in  human  form  and  appears  to  be  composed  of  a  white  misty  substance. 

The  doshi  is  a  shadowy  second  self It  leaves  the  body 

in  sleep  and  visits  other  people  in  dreams ;  the  doshi  of  the  dead  appears  to  the 
living  in  the  same  manner.     All  people  have  doshi,  but  only  the  adult  have  bun. 

Animals  have  doshi  but  not  bun.     At  death  the  bun  disappears,  no  one 

knows  whither ;  but  the  doshi  lingers  about  in  the  air,  visits  its  friends  and  haunts 
its  enemies ;   it   will  persecute  the  relations  if  the   body  has  not  received   proper 

burial Fetishes  have  <^/(3jV/?' but  no  (5««;  plants  and  weapons  have  neither."^ 

Similar  beliefs  are  held  by  the  Batetela  and  Bankutu.  The  former  consist  of  a 
number  of  related  tribes  spread  over  the  Lubefu  and  Lukenye  basins  between 
23°  and  25°  E.     The  Bankutu  are  a  neighbouring  tribe  to  the  west. 

"  Beside  the  body,  called  by  the  Sungu  diinba,  the  Batetela  believe  that 
man  is  composed  of  two  spiritual  elements:  a  shadowy  double,  called  by  the  Sungu 
oloki   and    by    the    Olemba    do,    and    a   '  soul '    (literally,    '  heart '),    called    by    the 

Sungu  idiinu The   '  double '   is  invisible,  except   in    dreams,   it 

leaves  the  owner's  body  without  his  knowledge,  and  no  harm  is  caused  by  its 
absence.  The  'soul'  leaves  the  body  only  at  death.  In  sleep  the  ' double '  may 
be  absent,  but  the  '  soul '  remains  with  a  man  as  long  as  he  lives.  All  people, 
even  new-born  infants,  possess  'souls,'  and  these  are  indestructible ;  neither  animals 
nor  plants  possess  them.  The  idimu  of  the  unburied  dead  visit  their  relatives  in 
dreams  to  remind  them  of  their  duties,  and,  in  the  same  way,  the  idimu  of  a 
deceased  chief,  if  it  desires  anything,  is  supposed  to  appear  in  a  dream  to  the  elder 
who  on  a  former  occasion  invested  the  chief  with  a  leopard-skin  at  his  inauguration  ; 
the  elder  so  visited  informs  the  village  and  the  wants  are  supplied. 

"  Homeless  idimu  remain  in  the  air  and  haunt  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
village  ;  it  happens  sometimes  on  a  dark,  moonless  night,  that  a  man  will  feel  the 
presence  of  some  being  near  him  ;  it  is  impalpable,  for  he  cannot  seize  it  if  he 

tries ;  this  is  an  idimu It  is  to  provide  accommodation  for  the 

idimu  that  small  huts  are  built  over  graves,  and  a  clever  device  to  keep  them  from 
wandering  at  night  is  to  kindle  small  fires  in  the  huts,  for,  if  this  is  done,  the  idimu 
will  remain  there  and  warm  themselves  instead  of  ranging  over  the  fields."^ 

'  "  Notes  on  the  Ethnography  of  the  Ba-Huana,"  Journal  of  the  A/ithropological  Institute, 
Vol.  XXXVI  (1906),  pp.  290,  291. 

-  These  two  paragraphs  are  from  MS.,  as  yet  unpublished,  lent  me  by  Messrs.  Torday  and  Joyce. 


lo6  Multiple  Souls  in  Negro  Africa. 

Among  the  Bankutu  the  incorporeal  part  of  man  is  believed  to  be  composed 
of  two  elements,  a  soul,  cdiiiio,  and  a  shadow  jinjingi.  The  latter  perishes  with 
the  body,  but  the  former  is  re-incarnated  in  the  first  child,  boy  or  girl,  born  to  a 
sister  of  the  deceased  after  his  death.  The  edinto  is  evidently  the  same  as  the  idiinu 
of  the  Sungu  and  the  e/imo  of  the  Olemba.  The  Hankutu,  however,  seem  to 
regard  the  continued  existence  of  the  editno  as  in  some  way  bound  up  with  the 
reception  of  proper  burial,  since  dead  slaves  are  always  eaten  but  never  buried. 
The  reason  given  for  this  is  that  the  soul  of  a  slave  who  had  been  buried  might 
return  and  kill  the  master  in  revenge  for  past  injuries,  whereas,  if  the  body  had 
been  eaten  he  could  not  do  so.^ 

Perhaps  the  greatest  development  of  this  doctrine  is  to  be  found  among  the 
Bambala,  the  chief  sub-tribe  of  the  Bushongo,  whose  territory  lies  between  the 
Kasai  and  Sankuru  rivers. 

The  Bambala  say  "  that  man  is  composed  of  four  parts,  the  body,  lo,  the 
double,  ilo,  the  soul,  n'shariga,  and  the  shadow,  lumeliune.     At  death  the  n'shanga 

seeks  the  uterus  of  a    woman and  is  born  again  in   a  child,  who   may 

remember  things  known  alone  to  the  former  owner  of  the  soul.     Some  wicked 

people  have  a  fifth  element,  nioena, which  leaves  the  body  at  death 

and  continues  to  do  evil,  causing   others  to  sicken  or  die ;  only  the 

spirits  of  old  men  can  haunt  others. "- 

Unfortunately  not  much  is  said  about  the  powers  and  actions  of  the  "  double  " 
and  of  the  "  shadow,"  but  some  further  information  is  given  about  the  Eastern 
Bushongo  (Bangongo  and  Bangendi)  who  hold  that  man  consists  of  four  parts,  the 
body,  inodyo,  the  mind,  mophuphu,  the  double,  ido,  and  the  shadow,  cdidingi.  A  dying 
man's  last  breath  is  also  called  mophuphu  and  when  this,  the  ido  and  the  edidingi 
leave  a  man  he  dies  (the  corpse  is  supposed  not  to  have  a  shadow).  No  harm 
results  from  the  absence  of  the  ido  from  the  body,  in  fact,  it  leaves  it  to  appear 
in  dreams. 

The  authors  state  that  "  Ordinarily  the  soul  returns  to  Jambi  [the  creator],"  but 
do  not  indicate  which  of  the  constituent  elements  they  regard  as  the  soul. 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  instances  given  have  all  been  drawn  from  West 
Africa  where  the  belief  is  widely  spread ;  it  has  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  been  found 
in  anything  like  its  typical  form  in  Eastern  Africa,  nevertheless,  the  Nilotes  have 
certain  beliefs  which  may  be  faint  reflections  of  the  doctrine,  though  1  do  not  wish 
to  press  this  point.  The  Dinka  believe  that  every  human  being  has  within  him 
two  souls.  The  atiep,  which  leaves  the  body  in  sleep  and  whose  wanderings  are 
the  common  source  of  dreams,  resembles,  or  perhaps  may  take,  the  form  of  the 
shadow.  The  second  "  soul  "  is  by  no  means  so  well  defined  as  the  aticp,  it  is 
sometimes  called  w/and  sometimes  we.  I  could  not  learn  anything  definite  about 
the  rol  during  life  ;  it  may  be  connected  with  the  vegetative  functions  of  the  body, 
but  after  death  it  remains  with  the  body  in  the  grave. 

The  Shilluk  recognise  two  immaterial  parts  of  man  called  ivei  and  tipo,  the 
former  meaning  "  breath,"  or  "  life,"  the  latter  "  shadow." 

C.  G.  Sei.igman. 


'  From  the  M.S.  already  cited. 

"^  E.  Torday  and  T.  A.  Joyce,  "Notes  Ethnographiques  sur  les  I'euples  Communcment 
appeles  Bakuba,  ausi  que  sur  les  Peuplades  .Vpparentees  les  Bushongo,"  in  Documents  F.thito- 
graphiques  concernant  les  Populations  du  Congo  Beige.     Tome  II,  Fasc.  1.     Bruxelles,  1910. 


(     107     ) 


LEADEN  TOKENS  FROM  MEMPHIS. 

Egypt  has  furnished  a  considerable  number  of  stamped  pieces  of  lead,  in  form 
roughly  resembling  coins,  and  clearly  belonging  to  the  Graeco-Roman  period.  So 
far  as  my  observation  goes,  these  may  be  divided  into  the  following  general 
classes. 

1 .  Direct  and  presumably  frauduleiit  imitations  of  silver  or  bronze  coins. — The 
commonest  of  these  are  copies  of  Ptolemaic  bronze  coins  of  the  second  and  first 
centuries  B.C. ;  others  reproduce  the  issues  of  towns  or  rulers  outside  Egypt  of 
about  the  same  or  earlier  date.  To  this  class  appear  to  belong  a  few  examples  of 
what  may  be  termed  hybrid  types,  where  the  designs  for  the  Obverse  and  Reverse 
are  derived  from  different  localities,  but  the  evident  intention  has  been  to  produce 
something  which  might  be  taken  for  a  coin.  So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  examine 
specimens  of  this  class  they  are  all  of  Ptolemaic  date.     One  of  this  class  occurs  here. 

Obv. : — Head  of  Ammon  r. 

Rev. : — Two  eagles  standing  /. :  to  r.  cornucopiae.  [17  mm.] 
This  is  the  only  example  in  the  collection  of  a  direct  copy  of  a  Ptolemaic 
coin,  probably  intended  as  a  forgery ;  the  Reverse  should  bear  the  legend 
riTOAEMAlOY  BAZIAEHZ,  but  this  cannot  be  read.  The  coin  copied  is  one 
of  the  commonest  of  the  Ptolemaic  series — a  copper  pentadrachm,  usually 
attributed  to  Euergetes  H  or  Soter  H,  but,  in  my  opinion,  probably  struck  under 
all  the  kings  from  about  150  B.C.  to  about  50  B.C.  (cf  Liverpool  Anna /s,  I,  p.  38). 

2.  Token-currency  of  Roman  times. — This  class  includes  a  very  large  number 
of  varieties,  the  great  majority  of  which  are  of  flat  and  rather  thin  fabric,  bearing 
types  of  the  same  general  kind  as  those  found  on  the  coins  of  the  Ale.xandrian 
mint;  it  would,  however,  be  impossible  to  regard  them  as  fraudulent  copies  of 
these  coins,  as  their  shape  is  quite  distinct  from  that  of  any  of  the  official  issues. 
I  described  a  considerable  collection  of  pieces  of  this  class,  derived  from  the 
excavations  of  Drs.  Grenfell  and  Hunt  at  O.xyrhynchus,  in  the  Numismatic 
Chronicle  for  1908,  p.  287;  and  in  that  article  I  stated  the  conclusion  that  these 
leaden  tesserae  were  a  token-currency  issued  locally  in  various  districts  of  Egypt 
in  the  second  and  third  centuries  A.D.  to  supply  the  need  of  small  change,  since 
the  Alexandrian  mint  had  ceased  to  strike  coins  of  low  denomination.  This 
conclusion  is  supported  by  all  the  further  evidence  which  has  since  come  to  light ; 
the  only  additional  point  to  be  specially  noted  is  that  all  the  e.xamples  whose 
provenance  I  have  been  able  to  trace  come  from  Middle  Egypt,  with  the  inclusion  of 
Memphis  ;  and,  so  far  as  the  types  used  have  any  local  association,  the  majority  of 
them  belong  to  the  same  district. 

3.  A  notlier  class  of  tokens,  apparently,  but  of  different  style. — These  are  generally 
smaller  and  more  dumpy  in  .shape  than  those  of  Class  2,  and  the  average  of 
execution  is  worse  ;  the  types  used,  also,  are  not  .so  closely  related  to  those  of  the 
official  Alexandrian  coins.  So  far  as  my  information  goes,  this  dumpy  class  is 
mainly  found  in  the  Delta  ;  at  any  rate,  it  was  not  represented  in  the  extensive 
finds  at  O.xyrhynchus,  while  more  specimens  seem  to  come  into  the  market  at 
Alexandria  than  at  Cairo.  The  evidence,  however,  is  really  insufficient  for  any 
definite  conclusion  ;  my  present  presumption  is  that  this  class  took  the  place  in 


io8  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

the  Delta  which  was  held  in  Middle  Egypt  by  Class  2.     It  may  be  added  that 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  leaden  tokens  having  been  found  in  the  Thebaid. 

4.  Seal  impressions. — These  are  mentioned  here  because  some  examples  are 
described  in  catalogues  with  pieces  of  the  three  preceding  classes.  Their 
resemblance  to  coins  is  really  accidental,  and  quite  superficial ;  they  are  stamped 
on  one  face  only,  the  other  often  showing  traces  of  the  object  upon  which  the  lead 
was  placed,  but  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  lump  of  lead  has  approximated  in 
form  to  a  coin.     There  is  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  them  from  the  tokens. 

5.  Amulets. — In  some  cases  amulets  were  made  in  the  shape  of  a  coin,  usually, 
however,  furnished  with  a  loop  for  suspension  ;  they  can  readily  be  distinguished 
from  the  ordinary  classes  of  leaden  tokens  by  their  types.  Conversely,  actual  coins 
were  sometimes  used  as  amulets,  or  at  any  rate  carried  in  the  same  manner. 

The  last  two  classes  may  be  disregarded  for  present  purposes. 

In  my  paper  on  the  Oxyrhynchus  tokens  I  identified  a  number  of  specimens 
as  probably  local  issues  of  Oxyrhynchus,  and  at  the  same  time  I  suggested  that 
further  information  from  the  discovery  of  examples  on  other  sites  might  make  it 
possible  to  assign  other  groups  of  tokens  to  their  places  of  issue.  The  collection 
made  by  Prof  Petrie  at  Memphis,  which  he  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  examine, 
throws  some  useful  light  on  certain  groups,  especially  of  Class  2 ;  and  it  will  be 
convenient  to  treat  these  groups  separately. 

A.  Memphite. — The  e.xistence  of  leaden  pieces  bearing  the  name  of  Memphis 
has  long  been  known,  and  specimens  are  not  uncommon.  To  the  description  of 
the  examples  in  the  Petrie  Collection  may  be  added  those  in  Signor  Dattari's 
Catalogue  to  give  an  idea  of  the  range  of  types ;  the  latter  will  be  denoted  by  their 
numbers  in  the  catalogue,  preceded  by  D.  The  descriptions  and  illustrations  of 
the  specimens  in  the  Demetrio  Collection  given  in  Feuardent's  Catalogue  are  too 
sketchy  to  make  identification  certain.     The  figures  here  are  enlarged  one  half. 

The  ordinary  type  of  the  Memphite  leaden  tokens  is  : — 

(i)  Obv  : — Nilus  seated  /.  on  rocks,  drapery  round  legs,  holding  in  r.  hand 
reed,  on  /.  arm  cornucopiae  :  facing  him,  Euthenia  standing  r.,  wearing  long 
robe,  holding  out  in  r.  hand  wreath  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Isis-Hekate  standing  to  front,  with  triple  face,  crowned  with 
horns  and  disk,  wearing  long  robe,  holding  on  r.  hand  uraeus  erect :  to  ;-., 
Apis-bull  standing  /.,  with  disk  between  horns:  above,  to  r.,  MEM<t>IC: 
border  of  dots  or  line.     [Petrie  Coll. :  three  specimens,  22-24  mm.] 

Feuardent  3596  may  be  an  example  of  this  type. 

The  Obverse  type  is  one  of  the  regular  Alexandrian  series.  The  figure  of  the 
triple-faced  Isis-Hekate  is  unusual,  though  it  occurs  in  statuettes  ;  the  Apis-bull  is 
really  the  standing  Memphite  type.  Dattari  describes  five  specimens  which  show 
minor  variations,  as  follows  : — 

(2)  Odv. : — As  (i) :  by  rocks,  crocodile  r. 

T^i-z'. .•— As  (i),  but  legend  MEM<I>HC.  [Petrie  Coll.:  24  mm. 
p.  6416,  6417  :  26  and  24  mm.] 
Dattari  identifies  the  female  figure  on  the  Obverse  as  Alexandria,  but  it  seems 
to  me  to  be  more  probably  intended  for  Euthenia.  He  also  mentions  a  serpent  in 
the  field  behind  Euthenia  on  the  Obverse,  and  another  above  Apis  on  the  Reverse  ; 
these  are  discernible  on  some  examples,  and  possibly  were  originally  present  on 
others ;  but  the  poor  average  of  preservation  makes  it  difficult  to  be  certain  as 
to  small  details. 


Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis.  109 

{i)  Obv.:-As{i). 

Rev.: — As  (i),  but    behind    Isis    a    small    figure  grasping  her   robe. 
[D.  6418  :  27  mm.] 

(4)  Obv. : — As  (l),  but  Euthenia  holds  two  ears  of  corn  in  her  /.  hand. 
Rev^ — As  (3),  with  ansate  cross  between  Isis  and  Apis.     [D.  6419: 

23  mm.] 

(5)  Obv. : — As  (l),  with  sixteen  genii  in  the  field  in  various  altitudes. 
Rev. : — As  (3),  with  a  figure  of  Ptah-.Sokar-Osiris  standing  /.  to  r.  of 

Apis  :  legend  arranged  in  two  lines   ^.p       [D.  6420  :  28  mm.] 

The  last  mentioned  is  the  only  one  in  which  the  variations  are  of  material 
importance ;  the  addition  of  the  si.xteen  genii,  referring  to  the  sixteen  cubits  rise  in 
the  Nile  required  for  a  good  inundation,  is  veiy  rare  on  Alexandrian  coins.  There 
is  one  more  piece,  of  smaller  size,  with  the  name  of  Memphis  and  generally 
similar  types. 

(6)  Obv.  .-—As  (4). 

Rev. : — Isis  standing  to  front,  head  r.,  crowned  with  horns  and  disk, 

holding  out  on  r.  hand  uraeus  crowned  with  disk;  to  r..  Apis  bull  standing  /., 

with  disk  between  horns,  on  base  decked  with  garlands :  between  Isis  and 

Apis,  a  disk  ;  above,  to  r.,  MEM<I>I.     [D.  6421  :   18  mm.] 

In  addition  to  the  pieces  with  the  name  of  Memphis,  there  are  others  which 

can  certainly  be  attributed  to  the  same  locality,  in  view  of  the  types  used. 

(7)  Obv.  .-—As  {I). 

Rev. : — As  (i),  but  without  legend  :  above  Apis,  small  winged  figure  /., 
holding  out  wreath  over  the  head  of  Isis :  border  of  dots.  [Petrie  Coll. 
D.  6492  :  24  mm.] 

(8)  Obv.: — As  (1),  but  behind   Euthenia  a  small   figure  r.  with  hand 
raised. 

Rev. : — As  (7),  but  instead  of  winged  figure,  disk  and  uraei  over 
Apis.     [D.  6493  :  20  mm.] 

(9)  Obv..— As.  (2,). 

Rev. : — As  (7),  but  above  Apis  Harpokrates  standing  holding 
branch  (?).     [D.  6494  :  20  mm.] 

(10)  Obv. : — Nilus  seated  /.  as  (i)  :  facing  him,  Euthenia  seated  r.  holding 
in  her  r.  hand  ears  of  corn  towards  Harpokrates  standing  /.,  crowned  with 
skftent,  r.  hand  to  mouth :  line  border. 

Rev.: — Isis  seated  r.,  crowned  with  disk  and  horns:  to  r.,  Apis-bull 
standing  /.,  with  disk  between  horns :  behind  Apis,  Horus  (?)  standing  /., 
holding  out  on  r.  hand  small  figure  of  Harpokrates  /.  :  above,  disk  :  line 
border.     [D.  6495  :  20  mm.] 

(l  I)  Obv. : — As  (10),  but  Harpokrates  holds  lotus-flower  in  /.  hand. 

Rev.: — As  (10),  but  figure  behind  Apis  appears  to  be  Ptah  holding 
out  uraeus.     [Petrie  Coll. :   17  mm.     U.  6496  :  20  mm.] 

(12)  Obv.:— As  (10). 

Rev.  :—\s\ii  standing  to  front,  with  both  arms  raised,  sistrum  in  r. 
hand.     [D.  6497  :  20  mm.] 

(13)  Obv.:— As  {i). 

Rev. : — Sarapis  (?)  standing  /.,  crowned  by  Nike  /.,  in  field,  B  :  border 
of  dots.     [Petrie  Coll. :  20  mm.] 


I  lO  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

(14)  Obv.: — As  (i):  beside  Nilus,  hippopotamus  r. 

Ret'. : — Figure  seated  r.  with  r.  hand  outstretched  to  Apis-bull 
standing  /.  on  base  decked  with  garlands :  in  field  above  Apis,  serpent  /. 
[D.  6505:   13  mm.] 

(15)  <9^c;..— Asfi). 

Rev. : — Figure  (priest  ?)  standing  /.,  holding  out  in  r.  hand  serpent : 

before  him,  Apis-bull  standing  r.,  with  disk  between  horns  :  above,  to  /., 

crescent :    border  of  dots.      [Biblioth^que  Nationale,  Rostovtsew  and  Prou 

No.  677  :  18  mm.] 

I  am  not  prepared  to  say  to  which  type  Feuardent's  No.  3597  belongs:  the 

Obverse  is  as  (i),  the  Reverse  is  described  as  a  male  figure  walking  r.,  leading  Apis 

with  ;-.  hand,  and  holding  a  serpent-staff  in  /.     If  this  description  is  correct,  the 

Reverse  type  would  appear  to  associate  Asklepios  with  Apis  ;  this  is  quite  possible 

at   Memphis,  where  Asklepios  was  worshipped  by  the  Greeks  as  identified  with 

Imhotep. 

B.  OXVRHYNCHITE. — There  are  in  the  Petrie  Collection  a  few  examples  of 
types  found  commonly  at  Oxyrhynchus  and  described  in  my  article  cited  above. 
The  presence  of  such  examples  is  not  extraordinary,  as  the  tokens  need  not  have 
been  confined  for  circulation  to  the  district  where  they  were  issued  ;  or  they  may 
have  drifted  after  discovery. 

The  types  specially  characteristic  of  Oxyrhynchus  are  a  bust  or  figure  of 
Athene  on  the  Obverse  and  a  figure  of  Nike,  sometimes  with  the  letters  OZ,  on  the 
reverse.  The  specimens  in  the  Petrie  Collection  are  of  the  following  types,  assigning 
the  numbers  as  in  my  previous  article  : — 

(i)  Obv. : — Bust  of  Athene  ;-.,  wearing  crested  helmet,  and  draped  :  rough 
oval  border  of  thick  line. 

Rev. : — Nike  advancing  /.,  wearing  long  chiton  with  diplois,  holding 

out  wreath  in  r.  hand,  in  /.  palm  over  shoulder :  in  field  to  /.  —  :  rough  oval 
border  of  thick  line.     [25  x  20  mm.] 

(2)  Obv. : — As  last,  with  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — As  last,  without  letters  in  field,  and  border  of  dots.     [16  mm.] 
(4)  Obv.: — Bust  of  Athene  as  (i):    in   front,  spear  upright:  border  of 
dots. 

Rev. : — As  (2).     [Two  specimens :  20  mm.] 

(7)  Obv. : — Athene  advancing  r.,  wearing  crested  helmet,  chiton,  and 
peplos,  with  small  shield  on  /.  arm  and  spear  raised  in  ;-.  hand,  attacking 
serpent  erect  /.  in  front  of  her  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — As  (l),  with  border  of  dots.     [18  mm.] 

(8)  Obv.  .-—As  last. 

Rev. : — As  last,  but  Nike  r.     [25  mm.] 
In  this  specimen  Athene  appears  to  hold  a  bipennis  instead  of  a  spear,  which 
is  a  variation  on  the  ordinary  type. 

(14)  Obv.: — Eusebeia  standing/.,  wearing  chiton  and  peplos,  holding  in 
r.  hand  patera  over  altar ;  in  /.,  cornucopiae :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — As  (2).     [Four  specimens:  one  16  mm.,  three  15  mm.] 
This   type,   though    not   distinctively   Oxyrhynchite,    might,    I    thought,   be 
assigned  to  the  local  issues,  on  account  of  the  large  numbers  of  specimens — ^44 — 
found  at  Oxyrhynchus. 


Leaden  Tokens  from  Memphis. 


II I 


A.  M  EMPHITE 


^■$;^^^ 


I 


B.    OXYRHYNKHITE 


1 1 2  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

C.  HermopoLITE  (?) — Several  specimens,  of  rather  poor  style,  may  be  grouped 
together  on  the  strength  of  their  types.     In  this  group  are  included  : — 

(i)  Obv.: — Hermanubis   advancing  r.,  both  arms   outstretched;   to    r., 
caduceus  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Hermes-Thoth  standing  /.,  crowned  with  modius,  wearing 
.himation,  holding  out  purse  in  r.  hand,  caduceus  on  /.  arm ;  above  r.  hand, 
ibis  n  :  border  of  dots.     [19  mm.J. 

(2)  Oiv.:—As(i). 

Rev: — As  (i),  but  without  purse,  and,  apparently,  without  ibis  ;  below 
r.  hand,  baboon  seated  /.  [20  mm.] 
To  this  group  belong  some  pieces  in  Dattari's  Catalogue ;  6523,  with  the 
same  Obverse  type  as  (i)  and  (2),  and  for  Reverse  type  a  bust  of  Kronos ;  6522,  the 
Obverse  of  which  seems  very  like  the  Reverse  of  (2),  with  a  temple  containing  two 
figures  on  the  Reverse  :  and  652 1,  the  Obverse  of  which  resembles  the  Reverse  of  (i), 
while  the  Reverse  has  a  nude  male  figure  standing  r. 

(3)  Obv. : — Hermanubis  standing  /.,  wearing  modius,  r.  hand  outstretched, 
caduceus  on  /.  arm  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Male  figure  standing  /.,  r.  hand  outstretched  over  bird  ;  in 
field  above,  L  T  :  border  of  dots.  [20  mm.] 
This  type,  like  (i)  and  (2),  presumably  comes  from  a  centre  of  the  worship  of 
the  Graeco- Egyptian  Hermanubis,  confused  with  the  Egyptian  Thoth  equated 
with  Hermes.  It  bears  a  date,  but  in  style  is  very  much  rougher  than  the  ordinary 
kind  of  dated  tokens  which  are  discussed  below.  Two  other  specimens  appear  to 
have  Hermes  types. 

(4)  Obv.: — Hermes  standing  /.,  holding  out  purse  in  r.  hand,  resting/. on 
staff:  border  of  dots. 

Rev.  .•— Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae,  drapery  over 
legs  ;  below,  crocodile  r. :  border  of  dots.     [19  mm.] 

(5)  Obv.  .—As  (4). 

Rev. : — Euthenia  standing  /.,  wearing  modius,  holding  two  ears  of 
corn  and  cornucopiae  :  border  of  dots.  [22  mm.] 
Dattari's  6480  and  6481  are  similar  to  (4);  and  in  the  same  group  may  be 
included  his  6519  and  6520,  the  Obverse  type  on  both  of  which  is  Hermanubis 
standing  r.,  with  a  caduceus  in  front;  the  Reverse  types  being  respectively  Dikaiosyne 
and  Tyche  standing  in  the  attitudes  usual  for  these  personifications  on  Alexandrian 
coins.     These  connect  with  the  next. 

(6)  Obv.  .-—Bust  of  Hermanubis  r.,  wearing  modius  with  lotus-petal  in 
front,  and  chlamys  :  by  /.  shoulder,  caduceus  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — Dikaiosyne  standing  /.,  holding  scales  and  cornucopiae: 
border  of  dots.     [Two  specimens  :  18  mm.] 

(7)  Obv. .-—Bust  of  Hermanubis   r.,  with  lotus-petal  on   head;  behind 
shoulder,  winged  caduceus  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — Bust  of  Isis-Demeter  r.,  draped,  wearing  modius;  in  front, 
torch  :  border  of  dots.     [20  mm.] 
The  Obverse  type  of  the  last  two  is  apparently  very  similar  to  that  of  Dattari's 
6478  and  6479,  the  former  of  which  has  on  the  Reverse  a  bust  of  Nilus ;  the  latter, 
Nilus  seated  /.,  with  Euthenia  below  and  four  genii  in  the  field. 


B.   OXYRHYNKHITE 


C.    HERMOPOLITE 


H 


114  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

There  are  two  other  pieces  which  may  be  intended  to  have  representations  of 
Hermes  or  Hermanubis  somewhat  similar  to  (i). 

(8)  Obv. : — Hermes  (?)  advancing  r.,  with  both  arms  outstretched  :  to  r., 
vase  (?) :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.:  Nilus  recHning  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae :  border   of 
dots  (?).     [23  mm.] 

(9)  Obv. : — Hermes  (?)  advancing  /.,  with  both  arms  outstretched. 
Rev. : — Nilus  reclining  ;-.     [19  mm.] 

It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  these  tokens,  characterised  by  Hermes- 
types  and  of  a  style  which  apparently  belongs  to  Middle  Egypt,  originate  from  the 
main  centre  of  the  worship  of  Hermes  in  that  district — Hermopolis  Magna 
(Ashmunen).  The  original  form  of  the  Hermes-cult  there  was  that  of  Hermes  as 
equated  with  Thoth  ;  but  the  Greek  Hermes  was  so  generally  absorbed  into  the 
Alexandrian  Hermanubis  that  the  appearance  of  the  latter,  who  represented 
a  distinct  equation  of  Hermes  with  Anubis,  in  a  home  of  the  Hermes-Thoth 
worship  is  not  really  unnatural. 

Following  this  clue,  two  of  the  specimens  in  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale  described 
in  Rostovtsew  and  Prou's  Catalogue  ("  Plombs  Antiques  de  la  B.N.,"  §  VHI,  in  Revue 
Nnmismatique,  1899)  may  be  added  to  the  Hermopolite  group;  these  are  No.  668, 
with  Obverse  three-quarter  length  figure  of  Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  reed  and 
cornucopiae,  Reverse  baboon  seated  /.  with  disk  on  head  and  caduceus  in  fore-paws, 
in  field  to  r.  yT;  and  No.  672,  with  similar  Obverse,  Reverse,  ibis  standing  r.  with 
caduceus  in  background:  in  field  L  B^  Feuardent's  No.  ^6ojbis  is  the  same  as  672, 
except  that  the  caduceus  is  not  mentioned  in  the  description.  This  last  is  very 
similar  in  motive  to  D(2)  below,  which  may  also  be  Hermopolite. 

D.  Dated  Types. — There  are  a  few  of  the  dated  tokens,  which,  as  pointed  out 
in  my  previous  article,  usually  bear  types  connected  with  Nilus,  and  are  of  rather 
better  style  than  the  majority  of  these  leaden  pieces.  The  specimens  here  are  as 
follows : — 

(i)  Obv.  : — Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae,  drapery  over 
legs  :  beneath,  crocodile  r. :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.  : — Three  ears  of  corn,  bound  together  :  in  field,  L  A  :  border  of 
dots.     [Two  specimens  :  22  mm.  :   =  D.  6456.] 

(2)  Ob7'. : — Nilus  seated  to  front,  head  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae, 
on  hippopotamus  (?)  r. :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Ibis  standing  /-. :  in  field,  L  €  :  border  of  dots.     [21  mm.] 

(3)  Obv.  .-—Nilus  seated  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae :  before  him, 
Euthenia  standing  ;-.,  holding  out  crown  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Osiris  standing  ;-.,  mummiform,  and  Isis  standing  /.,  with  r. 
hand  raised  and  sceptre  in  /. :  between,  LIB  :  border  of  dots.     [19  mm.] 

(4)  Obv. : — Three-quarter  length  figure  of  Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  reed 
■'and  cornucopiae:  line  border. 

Rev. : — Head  of  Zeus  Ammon,  crowned  with  disk  :  in  field  L  B  (?) : 
line  border.     [18  mm.] 

'  I  have  transposed  the  Obverse  and  Reverse  in  Rostovtsew  and  Prou's  descriptions,  as  it  is 
usual  to  find  the  date  on  the  Reverse  of  Egyptian  coins  of  this  period. 


Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis.  1 1 5 

(5)  Obv.: — Bust  of   Harpokrates  (?)    r.,    wearing    Iiemhem    crown:    line 
border. 

Rei'. : — Bust  of  Horus  r.,  wearing  skhent :  in  field  L  (?) :  line  border. 
[19  mm.] 

These  dated-tokens  I  was  formerly  inclined  to  ascribe  to  Alexandria,  in  view 
of  the  general  superiority  of  their  style  and  the  official  touch  given  by  the  use  of 
a  date.  They  are  found  sporadically  on  all  Roman  sites  in  Middle  Egypt  of  which 
I  have  any  information  :  and,  as  noted  above,  the  whole  class  to  which  they  belong 
may  probably  be  located  in  Middle  Egypt.  I  should  now,  therefore,  prefer  to 
abandon  the  ascription  to  Alexandria,  especially  as  one  of  those  described  above 
(C  3)  and  the  two  Paris  specimens  mentioned  at  the  end  of  C  seem  to  fall  into  the 
Hermopolite  group.  If  those  which  are  of  specially  good  workmanship  are  to  be 
regarded  as  coming  from  any  one  town  in  Middle  Egypt,  I  would  suggest  that  this 
town  was  probably  Antinoe,  which,  in  the  period  when  these  tokens  were  being 
issued,  was  the  chief  centre  of  art  in  Egypt  outside  Alexandria. 

The  attribution  to  Antinoe  is  supported  by  some  specimens  in  the  Bibliotheque 
Nationale,  if  Rostovtsew  and  Prou's  identification  of  the  heads  on  them  is  correct : 
they  describe  Nos.  665-6  as  having  on  Obverse  Nilus  seated  /.  on  hippopotamus 
(compare  D  (2)),  and  Reverse  two  busts  confronted,  Antinous  (?)  /.  with  crown  of 
disk  and  plumes,  and  a  female  bust  r.  with  lotus-flower  on  head,  in  field  L  B  :  and 
No.  667  with  a  similar  Reverse  but  without  date,  and  Obverse  a  male  figure  seated  /. 
on  a  low  throne,  with  sceptre  in  r.  hand.  Unfortunately  Mr.  J.  de  M.  Johnson's 
excavations  at  Antinoe  in  1914  did  not  throw  any  clear  light  on  the  leaden  tokens 
of  that  town,  as  he  found  that  the  second  and  third  century  mounds,  from  which 
evidence  on  this  point  might  have  been  derived,  had  been  almost  entirely  swept 
away  by  the  sebakhtn.  Feuardent  describes  a  piece  in  the  Demetrio  Collection 
(No.  1535)  which  has  the  ordinary  types  of  the  Alexandrian  bronze  of  Antinous — 
Obverse  ANTINOOY  HPWOC  and  bust  of  Antinous/.,  Reverse  Antinous  as 
Hermes  riding  r.  with  date  L  10 — but  in  lead,  which  might  be  a  token  of  Antinoe, 
but  is  more  probably  a  proof  of  the  bronze  ;  the  excellence  of  the  style  led 
Feuardent  to  assume  that  it  was  struck  in  Asia  Minor,  but  this  does  not  seem  a 
convincing  argument;  the  work  of  the  Alexandrian  mint  in  the  later  years  of 
Hadrian  was  quite  equal  to  that  of  Asia. 

E.  Miscellaneous  Types  of  Class  2. — There  are  a  few  examples  of  Class  2 
which  do  not  fall  into  any  of  the  foregoing  groups  and  cannot  be  assigned  to  any 
particular  town,  but  merit  description  : — 

(i)  Obv.: — Two    busts   facing    (possibly    Antoninus    Pius   r.,   and    M. 
Aurelius  /.>) :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Dikaiosyne   standing  /.,   holding   scales    and    cornucopiae : 
border  of  dots.     [24  mm.] 

(2)  Obv. : — Nilus   reclining   r.,   holding   cornucopiae   and   reed ;   above, 
genius  /,  holding  out  wreath  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — Dikaiosyne  as  ( I).     [21mm.] 

(3)  Obv. : — Two  figures  standing,  heads  facing  (Dioscuri  ?) :  line  border. 
Rev. : — Dikaiosyne  standing  r.,  holding  scales  and  cornucopiae,  and, 

facing,  Homonoia  standing  /.,  with  r.  hand  raised,  cornucopiae  on  /.  arm  : 
line  border.     [21  mm.] 

'  Prof.  Petrie  thinks  the  busts  are  more  probably  Hadrian  and  Antoninus  Pius. 

H   2 


Il6  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

(4)  C-^z'..— As(3). 

Rev. : — As  (3),  but  Homonoia  r.,  and  Dikaiosyne  /.     [22  mm.] 

(5)  Obv. : — Two  busts  facing — Harpokrates  (?)  wearing  lumhem  crown 
to  r.  and  Sarapis  wearing  modius  to  /. :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — Nike    advancing   /.,    holding   out   wreath:    border   of  dots. 
[20  mm.] 

(6)  Obv. : — Roma  (?)  standing  to  front,  head  /.,  wearing  helmet  and 
cuirass,  holding  on  r.  hand  Nike  >:,  resting  left  on  spear  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Nike  advancing  r. :  border  of  dots.     [22  mm.] 

(7)  Obv. : — Sarapis  standing  to  front,  head  r.,  r.  hand  on  staff,  /.  wrapped 
in  himation  :  border  of  dots. 

Ret'. : — Nike    standing    r.,  writing  on  shield   supported   on   pillar : 
border  of  dots.     [22  mm.] 

(8)  Obv. : — Bust  of  Sarapis  r.,  wearing  modius  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev.: — Bust  of  Isis  r.,  crowned  with  disk    and   horns:   border  of 
dots.     [19  mm.] 

(9)  Obv. : — Isis  seated  k,  holding  up  lotus-flower  in  /.  hand  ;  before  her, 
Harpokrates  standing  /.,  crowned  with  skhent,  r.  hand  to  mouth :  line 
border. 

Rev.: — Illegible.     [18  mm.] 

(10)  Obv.: — Isis,  crowned  with  disk  and  horns,  seated  r.  on  rocks. 

Rev. : — Haroeris  (?)  standing  /.,  bearded  (?),  holding  hawk  on  r.  hand, 
club  on  /.  arm.     [14  mm.] 

(11)  Obv. — Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae :  border  of 
dots. 

Rev. : — Harpokrates  (?)  standing  ;.,  wearing  modius  and  himation, 
r.  hand  raised,  club  (?)  in  /.  :  border  of  dots.     [18  mm.] 

(12)  Obv.  : — Nilus  reclining  /. :  below,  crocodile  r.  :  line  border. 
Rev. : — Bes  (?)  standing  to  front :  line  border.     [17  mm.] 

(13)  Obv.: — Female  bust  r.,  draped :  traces  of  letters  round:  border  of 
dots. 

Rev. : — Nilus  reclining  /.,  holding  cornucopiae  and  reed  :  border  of 
dots.     [Two  specimens  :  24  and  18  mm.] 

(14)  Obv.: — Nilus  seated  /.  on  rocks,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae, 
drapery  over  legs  and  /.  arm. 

Rev. : — Euthenia   reclining  /.,   holding   out   ears   of  corn :  /.  elbow 
resting  on  sphinx  r.     [29  mm.] 

(15)  Obv.: — Bird  standing;'.:  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Winged  genius  advancing  /.,  nude,  stooping  with  r.  hand 
outstretched  over  bird  :  border  of  dots.  [Seven  specimens  :  12-14  mm.] 
The  last  of  the  above-mentioned  types  approaches  in  workmanship  to  Class  3  : 
it  is  rough  and  clumsy,  so  much  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  particular  species 
of  bird  is  intended  to  be  represented  on  the  Obverse :  on  some  specimens  it  resembles 
a  goose,  on  others  it  is  more  like  an  ibis.  Judging  from  the  number  of  examples, 
the  piece  should  originate  from  some  place  near  Memphis. 

(16)  Obv.: — Hawk-headed  divinity  standing  /.,  wearing  skhent  (?)  and 
cuirass,  holding  out  on  r.  hand  hawk  r.,  resting  /.  on  spear :  before  him,  on 
ground,  serpent  erect  r. :  border  of  dots  and  inner  circle  of  line. 

Rev. : — Shrine  (?),  within  which  hawk  /.  (?).     [28  mm.] 


H   3 


1 1 8  Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 

This  type  is  Dattari's  6433  (PI.  XXXVI).  As  he  points  out,  the  Obverse  type 
is  that  of  the  Sethroite  Nome  :  and,  if  the  piece  is  to  be  ascribed  to  that  nomc,  we 
have  here  an  example  coming  from  the  Delta  which  is  not  of  the  fabric  of  Class  3. 
It  is,  however,  rather  unlike  any  of  the  other  tokens  of  Class  2  in  style,  and  may 
represent  the  issues  of  the  extreme  east  of  the  Delta. 

(17)  Obv. : — Nilus  seated  /.,  holding  reed  and  cornucopiae  :  border  of  dots. 

Rev. : — Sarapis  standing  to  front,  r.  hand  raised,  short  staff  in  /.  : 

border  of  dots.     [20  mm.] 

This  appears  to  be  the  same  as  Dattari's  No.  6482.     Dattari  describes  the 

Reverse  type  as  Helios,  with  head  radiate.     If  this  is  correct — the  condition  of  the 

present  specimen  makes  it  impossible  to  say  with  certainty — the  figure  is  probably 

intended  for  Helios-Sarapis ;    the  attitude  is  a  characteristic  one  for  Sarapis  on 

third  century  Alexandrian  coins.     This  piece  was  obtained  at  Hawara. 

F.  Class  3. — If  the  assumption  that  Class  3  comes  from  the  Delta  is  correct, 
it  is  natural  that  this  class  should  not  be  extensively  represented  in  a  collection 
formed  at  Memphis.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  only  two  types  occur,  though  each  of 
these  furnishes  a  considerable  number  of  examples. 

(i)  Odv. : — Helmeted  head  r. 

Rev.: — {a)  Helmeted  head /.     [Four  specimens  :   Ii-i3mm.] 
{J})  Helmeted  head  r.     [Five  specimens  :   ii-i3mm.] 
The  execution  of  most  of  these  specimens  is  bad  :  on  the  better  examples  the 
helmet  on  the  Obverse  seems  to  be  of  the  crested  Athenian   form,  that  on  the 
Reverse  Corinthian  :  but  it  is  impossible  to  speak  with  certainty  as  to  the  intentions 
of  the  artist.     On  one  or  two  specimens  there  is  an  attempt  at  a  border  of  dots. 
(2)  Obv. : — Head  and  neck  of  horse  r. 

Rev. : — Forepart  of  horse  r.  [Eleven  specimens  :  13-17  mm.] 
The  workmanship  shown  in  pieces  of  this  type  is  even  worse  on  the  average 
than  in  (i),  and  is  in  most  cases  simply  barbarous.  Two  examples  are  fairly  clear  : 
and  on  these  there  are  borders  of  dots  round  the  types.  The  rest  are  of  various 
degrees  of  badness,  the  worst  being  so  debased  that  it  would  be  hopeless  to  guess 
what  object  was  intended  to  be  depicted  if  less  degraded  specimens  were  not 
available  for  comparison. 

It  may  be  remarked,  in  connexion  with  this  class,  that  in  my  previous  paper 
I  a.scribed  to  Hermopolis  Magna  a  token  with  the  types  of  head  of  Zeus  Ammon 
and  baboon  squatting  r.  This  is  distinctly  of  Class  3  in  style,  and  quite  unlike  any 
of  the  tokens  grouped  above  as  belonging  to  Hermopolis  Magna.  I  am  now 
therefore  inclined  to  suggest  that  it  should  be  attributed  to  the  Delta  town  of 
Hermopolis  Parva. 

G.  Class  i. — Besides  the  one  direct  copy  of  a  current  coin  in  the  collection 
there  are  some  interesting  examples  of  what  I  have  called  hybrid  types.     Such  are  : — 

(i)  Obv.  .-—Radiate  head  of  Helios  (?)  to  front. 
Rev.: — Bee  (in  sunk  circular  field).     [15  mm.] 
Both  Obverse  and   Reverse  types  in  this  case  suggest  Asiatic   origin  ;    the 
Obverse  is  presumably  from  Rhodes,  the  Reverse  Ephesian. 
(2)  Obv. : — Turreted  female  head  r.,  in  wreath. 

Rev. : — Stag(?)  standing  r.,  looking  back.     [16  mm.] 
The  Reverse  type  here  is  again  probably  Ephesian  ;    the  Obverse  may  be 
derived  from  Smyrna. 


Leaden   Tokens  from  Memphis. 


119 


10 


^1^ 


m~^.  ■ 


■v/;^ 


11  ^^^^^ 


E.  MISCELLANEOUS 


F.    DELTA 


1     ^<^^^  ^'W^BT    2 

G.    HYBRID     TYPES 


• 


H  4 


'  20  Leaden  Tokens  from  Memphis. 

(3)  Obv.  .-—Head  of  griffin  r. 
Rev.: — Prow.     [10  mm.] 

The  types  of  thi.s  specimen  are  both  found  in  many  Greek  cities  ;  if  the  Ionian 
relationships  of  (i)  and  (2)  are  to  be  sought  in  (3)  as  well,  the  Obverse  type  may 
come  from  I'hocaea  and  the  Reverse  from  Samos. 

(4)  ObiK  : — Head  wearing  elephant-skin  cap  r. 
Rev.: — Eagle's  head /. :  border  of  dots.     [16  mm.] 

The  devices  used  in  this  case  are  both  Ptolemaic,  although  the  Reverse  type 
does  not  occur  on  Ptolemaic  coins. 

(5)  Obv. : — Female  head  r. 

Rev.: — Cornucopiae.     [Two  specimens  :  17  and  13  mm.] 
The  head  on  these  pieces  might  be  a  rough  copy  of   that  of  one  of  the 
Ptolemaic  queens,  on  whose  silver  coins  the  cornucopiae  is  a  frequent  Reverse  type. 

(6)  Obv. : — Nude  male  figure  kneeling  ;-.  (Atlas  ?). 
Rev.: — Effaced.     [18  mm.] 

(7)  Obv. : — Snake-footed  figure  /.,  with  /.  hand  raised. 
Rev. : —     ?     [Two  specimens  :  20  and  17  mm.] 

The  Obverse  types  of  (6)  and  (7)  are  distinctly  Greek  in  conception,  though  I 
do  not  recall  their  occurrence  on  coins.  The  Reverse  type  of  (7)  is  very  obscure : 
it  seems  to  be  a  confused  copy  of  some  group  of  objects,  for  which  I  cannot  suggest 
an  interpretation. 

(8)  Obv.  .-—Head  (?)  ;-. 

Rev.: — Dolphin?-.     [14  mm.] 

(9)  Obv. : — Hippopotamus  (?)  /. 

Rev. : — Sphinx   seated  r.,    with   r.  paw  raised :    in    circular   incuse. 
[16  mm] 
The  last  is  in  fabric  unlike  any  others  of  this  class,  and  I  should  be  inclined 
to  regard  it  as  an  amulet  rather  than  as  a  token. 

I  have  to  thank  Prof.  Petrie  for  the  opportunity  of  studying  and  publishing 
these  pieces.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  further  collections  from  ascertained  localities 
will  enable  more  certain  identifications  of  the  origin  and  purpose  of  the  various 
classes  to  be  reached. 

J.  G.  Milne. 


A  few  which  were  not  sufficiently  distinct  for  description  are  here  added, 
distinguished  by  letters.  A  seems  to  be  a  variant  of  C  (5).  B  and  C,  by  the  type 
of  the  head,  are  apparently  from  the  same  hand  as  E  (8)  and  E  (i  3).  F  is  of  bronze, 
but  evidently  not  of  an)'  regular  coin  fabric.  The  ram  has  an  indistinct  object 
over  it ;  after  clearing,  the  other  side  shows  a  helmeted  head.  G  shows  a  helmeted 
head,  H  a  head  of  Medusa.  The  Reverse  type  of  K  is  a  figure  in  a  cloak  leaning 
on  a  staff.     L  is  fairly  sharp  but  entirely  unintelligible. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


Leaden  Tokens  from  Memphis. 


121 


^:^^ 


(      122      ) 


THE   STONE   AGE    IN    EGYPT. 
{Continued^ 

Resuming  the  subject  already  treated  on  pp.  59  to  yj  of  our  last  number,  we 
now  touch  the  well-defined  period  of  the  prehistoric  graves  of  Egypt.  The 
Egyptian  record  places  the  close  of  this  at  about  5500  B.C.;  and,  looking  at  the 
proportion  which  the  number  of  graves  bears  to  those  of  historic  ages,  it  seems 
that  the  rise  of  that  civilisation  is  not  likely  to  have  been  later  than  8ocx)  B.C. 
The  main  point  to  be  observed  is  the  close  connection  with  the  Magdalenian  cave 
products,  and  the  finest  Danish  work,  suggesting  that  we  may  find  some 
synchronism.  One  of  the  most  characteristic  forms  is  the  large  three-faced  blade 
169,  170.  Such  a  blade  usually  has  a  considerable  wind,  or  twist,  in  the  plane  of 
it,  and  this  had  to  be  removed  by  detailed  flaking  before  a  truly  flat  blade  could  be 
formed,  as  a  basis  for  the  remarkably  thin  flat  knives,  such  as  176,  177.  On  169 
the  edge  has  been  partly  flaked  ;  the  snubbing  due  to  scraping  always  makes  an 
edge  much  steeper,  but  this  flaking  reaches  far  back  in  the  direction  of  the  face. 
The  back  edge  has  been  elaborately  worked  in  a  cris-cross  pattern,  which  is 
a  marked  feature  in  the  decoration  of  Danish  flints,  as  181.  This  is  so  purely  an 
artistic  feature,  and  so  far  removed  from  anything  naturally  suggested  by  flint 
fractures,  that  we  can  hardly  avoid  granting  a  connection  of  descent  between  the 
two.  On  the  back  edges  of  170,  171,  there  is  a  mere  snubbing  due  to  scraping; 
and  172,  with  a  cris-cross  edge  the  whole  length  of  it,  has  been  a  large  blade  with 
fine  ripple  pattern  on  the  face  (like  the  Danish  178,  M.,  349),  but  it  has  been  so 
greatly  snubbed  down  by  right-handed  scraping  that  it  is  reduced  to  a  point.  In 
other  cases  a  fine  thin  blade,  with  ripple-flaking  on  both  sides,  has  been  snubbed 
down  by  right-handed  scraping  in  all  four  ways,  until  it  is  less  than  half  its  original 
breadth.  173  is  put  here  to  show  the  form  of  the  back  of  172  ;  it  is  the  remaining 
butt  of  a  flake  like  169,  after  the  whole  of  the  upper  part  has  been  snubbed  away. 
174  is  the  top  end  of  a  similar  blade  with  snubbing  begun,  and  175  is  a  similar  butt 
end  turned  the  other  way  up  to  show  the  detail  of  the  flaking.  Thus  the  whole  of 
this  row  are  varieties  of  treatment  of  the  same  kind  of  flake. 

Another  close  link  with  the  Danish  is  in  the  vague  surface-flaking  or  scaling 
on  176  and  177,  like  the  forms  179  (Denmark,  M.,  350)  and  180  (Seine,  M.,  353). 
The  dates  of  the  Egyptian  examples  may  not  only  be  given  in  a  general  period, 
but  many  of  them  dated  more  closely  by  sequence  dates.  The  whole  period  of  the 
prehistoric  cemeteries  is  divided  into  fifty  parts,  numbered  30  to  79,  which  last 
touches  the  beginning  of  the  1st  dynasty  {Tarkhan,  I,  3).  In  this  dating  Nos.  170 
and  17!"  are  between  34  and  38  S.D.  ;  174  is  of  46  S.D.  ;  175  of  43  s.u. ;  176-7  are 
of  52  S.D.     No.  181  is  from  Denmark  {Nonliske  Fortidsminder,  IV,  PI.  XXVI). 

A  striking  resemblance  is  that  of  the  coarse  flakes  which  abound  in  the 
prehistoric  graves  (182-184)  to  the  Magdalenian  cave  type  (185-188,  M.,  134-5-9-7). 
The  slight  waviness  of  outline,  the  proportions  of  the  flake,  the  slight  end  chipping, 
are  all  so  closely  alike,  that  they  could  hardly  be  .sorted  apart  if  mixed.  These 
three  flakes  are  of  S.D.  32  to  48,  61,  and  70.     The  flakes  189  to  194  are  of  sequence 


\:^,ssJ^i>j^^'^'^' 


180 


Egyptian  and  Danish  Flints  of  Fine  Work. 


124  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

dates  34  to  46,  47  to  50,  56,  58,  61  and  63  respectively.  They  are  given  to  show 
how  snubbing  of  the  edge,  by  scraping,  is  closely  like  what  is  characteristic  of 
Aurignacian  flints  in  Europe,  as  in  195  (S.,  Fig.  53),  196  (S.,  xxxiii)  and  197 
(S.,  xvii),  all  of  early  Aurignacian  age.  This  is  a  striking  example  of  the 
recurrence  of  a  utility  type,  produced  merely  from  similar  necessities,  without  any 
artistic  design. 

Touching  on  the  beginning  of  historic  times,  there  is  a  curious  type  found  in 
the  lowest  levels  of  the  town  of  Abydos,  No.  198.  The  teeth  are  too  fragile  to  saw 
any  material ;  but  the  explanation  was  given  by  seeing  an  iron  scraper  of  just  this 
form  used  by  Neapolitans  for  scraping  off  scales  from  fish.  The  type  199-201  is 
well  fixed  in  date  to  the  earlier  half  of  the  1st  dynasty ;  the  first  two  are  from  the 
tomb  of  Zer,  the  third,  worse  made,  from  the  tomb  of  Zet,  and  they  steadily 
deteriorate  to  the  end  of  the  dynasty,  and  become  flat-ended  in  the  Ilnd  dynasty 
{^Abydos,  I,  xiv,  xv).  Yet  the  French  example,  202,  absolutely  the  same  in  detail, 
comes  from  the  Grotte  de  I'Eglise  (M.,  120),  and  therefore  should  be  of  the 
Solutrean  age,  which  we  know  by  the  Fayum  flints  is  before  prehistoric  graves. 
The  only  explanation  seems  to  lie  in  the  chance  of  this  belonging  to  a  higher  level 
of  later  date  than  the  rest  of  the  Grotte. 

The  arrow  heads  of  the  1st  dynasty,  203-205,  are  from  the  tomb  of  Aha,  at 
the  beginning  of  that  dynasty,  most  nearly  like  a  type  from  the  Gironde,  206 
(M.,  378).  The  general  subject  of  the  history  of  flint-work  in  the  prehistoric 
cemeteries  and  historic  time  is  not  dealt  with  here,  but  only  so  far  as  it  is  related 
to  Europe. 

We  can  now  see  how  many  questions  are  raised,  and  how  much  can  be  linked 
together,  by  the  comparison  of  Egyptian  and  European  types.  Most  of  the 
Egyptian  are  so  closely  like  the  European  that  a  presumption  must  be  allowed  of 
a  general  equivalence  in  age,  yet  some  cases  show  clearly  a  repetition,  such  as  the 
Aurignacian  resemblances.  How  far  may  we  in  the  later  periods  venture  on 
a  close  synchronism  ?  The  Magdalenian  flint  types  in  Egypt  are  associated  with 
bone  harpoons,  which  are  also  of  that  age  in  Europe.  The  historic  Egyptian  kept 
up  the  harpoon  as  a  weapon  of  sport,  but  only  used  by  the  higher  classes  and  not  in 
business  fishing  ;  much  as  archery  is  kept  up  as  a  sport  in  England,  long  after  fire- 
arms are  used  for  real  fighting.  For  actual  use  we  only  find  the  bone  harpoon 
from  S.D.  38-57,  and  the  copper  harpoon  from  34  to  61  S.D.  (Naqadeh,  El-Amrah, 
Gerzeh).  This  Magdalenian  weapon  therefore  belongs  to  the  first  and  part  of  the 
second  prehistoric  civilisation,  say  8000-6000  B.C.  Not  a  single  example  was 
found  in  the  two  thousand  graves  of  the  1st  dynasty  age  at  Tarkhan. 

This  raises  the  question  whether  it  will  be  possible  to  extend  the  Magdalenian 
cave  period  as  late  as  the  Egyptian  graves,  of  about  7000  B.C.,  or  to  trace  a  descent 
of  the  type  to  a  later  time.  This  connection  is  an  additional  reason  for  keeping  to 
the  Egyptian  chronology,  and  not  adopting  the  arbitrary  theories  of  Berlin  which 
would  bring  down  these  Magdalenian  types  to  about  3500  B.C. 

Another  serious  European  question  is  the  synchronism  of  the  finest  Danish 
work  with  the  same  age.  The  details  of  regular  parallel  ripple-flaking,  of  scale- 
flaking,  and  above  all  of  cris-cross  ornamentation,  are  so  closely  alike  in  Egypt 
and  Denmark,  and  so  absent  in  intervening  countries,  that  we  may  almost  suppose 
that  they  were  brought  by  two  branches  of  the  same  race  from  some  common 
source.  Generally,  these  fine  works  in  Europe  would  be  placed  much  later  than  the 
Magdalenian  age,  bordering  on  the  use  of  copper  ;  so  there  would  probabl}-  be  no 
objection  to  dating  the  Danish  work  to  7000-6000  B.C.,  like  the  Egyptian. 


185 


187       188 


Flakes  krom  Prehistoric  Egyptian  Graves  ;  with  Magdai-enian  and  Aurignacian. 


126  The  Stone  Age  in  Egyft. 

In  concluding  the  comparisons  of  flint-working  in  Egypt  and  Europe,  the  only 
reasonable  view  to  follow  seems  to  lie  in  the  distinction  between  artistic  and  utility 
types.  While,  on  the  one  hand,  it  would  be  contrary  to  all  the  history  of  artistic 
development  to  assign  Chellean  flints  to  a  late  period,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
mere  results  of  use  and  requirements  of  daily  life  may  easily  produce  like  effects, 
if  the  materials  and  habits  are  similar. 

Having  now  reviewed  the  principal  types  of  flint-work  found  in  Egypt,  it  is 
needful  to  state,  as  briefly  as  we  can,  the  relation  between  those  types  as  found  in 
Europe,  and  the  physical  conditions  which  were  contemporary  with  them.  But, 
entering  on  this  subject,  we  experience  the  strong  currents  of  different  opinions 
among  geologists  as  to  the  glacial  periods.  As  it  is  impossible  to  handle  so  complex 
a  subject  as  a  by-issue,  I  can  but  say  that,  as  in  earlier  ages  the  distribution  of 
animals  shows  great  changes  of  land  and  sea  to  have  occurred,  as,  also,  the 
submerged  river  channels  along  the  American  coast  prove  such  large  changes  of 
level  to  have  been  geologically  late,  and,  as  beds  of  tertiary  plants  prove  great 
changes  of  climate  to  have  occurred — so,  from  such  evidence,  we  are  assured  that 
there  is  no  improbability  in  the  changes  traced  in  the  glacial  periods.  As  such 
changes  occurred  at  other  times,  we  need  no  overwhelming  evidence  to  credit  them 
within  the  last  million  years.  The  evidence  that  is  described,  as  by  the  last  work 
of  the  late  Dr.  James  Geikie,  The  Antiquity  of  Man  in  Europe  (1914),  appears  quite 
sufficient  to  show  that  the  earlier  extent  of  changes  was  carried  on  into  the  ages 
in  question.  As  Dr.  Geikie  kindly  replied  on  any  points  that  were  not  clear  to  me, 
the  Table  here  may  be  taken  as  giving  the  results  in  accord  with  a  principal 
authority.  The  degree  of  precision  of  the  results  varies  a  good  deal,  as  we  shall 
state  below. 

At  first  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  fluctuations  of  glacial  periods  were 
peculiar  to  recent  times ;  but  it  is  only  from  recent  times  that  we  have  wide-spread 
land  surfaces  for  study.  Of  all  the  earlier  ages  we  know  hardly  anything  but 
sea-  or  lake-deposits,  with  scarcely  any  old  land  surface  visible  except  in  a  short 
section.  Hence,  we  cannot  expect  to  find  earlier  evidence  like  that  which  we  have 
on  our  present  earth  surface.  The  questions  of  the  extent  of  the  ice  sheet  do  not, 
however,  at  all  affect  the  relations  with  Egypt,  with  which  we  are  here  concerned. 
Only  the  changes  of  sea-level  in  Europe  are  here  involved. 

Such  changes  of  climate  and  of  elevation  are  termed  now  Glacial  and  Inter- 
glacial,  from  the  fact  of  traces  of  ice  action  giving  us  the  plainest  evidences.  But 
we  cannot  suppose  that  such  fluctuations  at  the  freezing  limit  were  not  accompanied 
by  similar  changes  in  other  parts.  It  is  recognised  that  the  elevation  and  depression 
of  Gibraltar  is  to  be  connected  with  similar  movements  in  France,  England,  and 
the  Baltic.  If  these  changes  took  place  at  Gibraltar,  they  probably  may  also  be 
found  a  little  farther  south,  in  Egypt ;  and  as  similar  changes  of  level  and  of 
climate  have  been  traced  out  by  Blanckenhorn  in  Palestine,  it  is,  therefore,  to  be 
expected  that  the  movements  should  be  equally  found  in  Egypt. 

It  has  been  usual  to  speak  of  elevation  and  depression  of  the  land  ;  but  it  is 
absurd  to  suppose  an  equal  earth  movement  of  one-tenth  of  a  mile  vertical  over 
2,000  miles  from  Gibraltar  to  Norway.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  truer  terms 
are  fall  and  rise  of  sea-level,  probably  due  to  displacement  of  the  earth's  centre  of 
gravity.     The  active  causes  we  cannot  discuss  here. 

The  changes  are  traced  by  various  evidences.  There  is  the  ploughing  out  of 
valleys  by  ice  below  their  tributaries,  and  the  banks  of  debris  carried  by  glaciers, 
and  left  as  moraines  or  erratic  blocks.     There  are  the  scratches  and  grooves  left 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


127 


on  rock  surfaces  by  the  cutting  of  stones  bedded  in  the  ice.  There  are  the  levels 
of  glacier  action  on  the  mountains,  and  the  raised  beaches  along  the  coasts.  There 
are  the  submarine  valleys  and  plateaus  showing  old  land  surfaces.  There  are  the 
deposits  of  Arctic  or  southern  plants,  and  bones  of  animals,  showing  the  temperature  ; 
also  the  forest  beds  now  submerged.  From  such  facts,  the  meaning  of  which 
seems  trivial  unffl  they  are  united,  the  history  of  the  changes  of  the  last  million, 
or  so,  of  years  has  gradually  been  pieced  together.  At  present  any  single  fact 
of  the  kind  has  a  greatly  enhanced  value  to  us,  as  it  either  fits  into  place  in  the 
scheme  already  laid  out,  or  else  adds  some  fresh  feature. 


Dates. 


Period. 


6th  Glacial  . 
5th  Inter  G. . 
5th  Glacial  . 

4th  Inter  G. . 


-  20,000   4th  Glacial 
Max. 


3rd  Inter  G. . 


-80,000 


180,000 


2nd  Inter  G. 


400,000 


600,000 


700,000 


1st  Inter  G. . 

1st  Glacial  . 
Pleistocene. 


Sea 
Level, 
Feet. 


Temperature, 
Fah. 


Conditions  and  Hu.man 
Work. 


+  30 


+  SO 


+  130 


'  (  Forest  "j 
-j  1500  ft.  [-- 

!  l     "P      J 


3rd  Glacial  ...     +700 


-600 


2nd  Glacial ...    +900 


Pliocene 


-    50 

-200 

+  300 


Arctic  "I 

plants   \ 

Thames  j 


Southern  \   ,  ,  -t 
Mammals/        ^ 


-30 


Southern  \ 
Mammals  / 


-30 


Southern  \  ,  ,„= 
Mammals/  ■^'° 

-'3° 


Small  Glaciers 
Wider  coasts 
Considerable  Glaciers 


r  Britain  Continental 

-j  Great  Baltic  Lake  

I,  Neolithic  (with  Azilian) 

Great  Baltic  Glacier         

Magdaleiiian 

{Solutrean 
Aurignacian 


Intermediate 


Britain  Continental   Mousterian 
Land  far  in  Atlantic 

Z"  Gibraltar  upper  breccia 

J  Ice  sheet  in  N.W.  Europe 
I  N.  and  mid-Britain  submerged 
'         Before  coldest  Motislerian 
Torrents  cut  Gib.  breccias 

(  North  Sea,  dry  Acheiilian 

J  Britain  Continental,  cooler 
j  Spain  wide  in  Chellean 

\      Mediterranean  warmest 

Gibraltar  lower  breccia 
Maximum  glaciation 
T       /  3500  ft.,  Scotland  .. 
'"  \  2800  ft.,  S.Jutland 

Arctic  plants  in  Norfolk 
Earliest  man  of  Heidelberg 


Snow  line  4000  ft.  below  now 


Wholly  Arctic  in  N.  Sea 
Gradually  cooling 
-I-  20°    South  molluscs  in  N.  Sea. 


Geologic  Stages. 


Daun.  Upper  Tuvb. 

Up.  Forestian. 

Gschnitz. 

Low  Turbarian. 

Low.  Forestian. 

C  Buhl. 

\  Mecklenburg. 

I,  Wurmian. 

Dlirntenian. 

/  Polonian. 
\  Rissian. 


Tyrolean. 


(Saxonian. 
Mindelian. 


/  Forest  Bed. 
(^  Norfolkian. 

(Scanian. 
GUnzian. 


The  Table  states  first  the  date  of  each  period.  This  is  but  a  very  vague 
approximation,  gleaned  from  the  changes  which  went  on,  and  it  is  probably  a 
minimum.  The  periods  may  have  been  much  longer,  they  are  unlikely  to  have 
been  shorter.  At  least  such  dates  give  some  sense  of  reality  and  proportion, 
though  they  cannot  be  taken  as  definite  statements.  The  names  of  the  periods 
are  only  applied  for  convenience,  beginning  as  far  back  as  the  series  of  changes 


128  The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 

can  be  continuously  traced.  The  levels  in  feet  show  the  movement  of  the  sea, 
—  down,  or  +  upward,  from  the  present  level ;  the  later  rises  of  the  sea  are  well  fixed 
by  the  raised  beaches,  but  the  earlier  amounts  depend  on  extent  of  submerged 
land  surfaces,  limits  of  ice  action,  and  changes  which  only  give  an  approximation  ; 
the  amounts  are  rather  vague,  but  they  at  least  show  the  kind  of  movements 
involved.  The  temperature,  above  or  below  the  present,  is  gleaned  from  statements 
of  the  downward  limits  of  snow  and  ice,  and  upward  limit  of  forest  growth,  on  the 
scale  of  300  feet  of  elevation  to  1°  Fah.  Also  from  the  the  presence  of  Arctic 
plants,  or  of  southern  mammals ;  and  from  the  present  temperature  of  places 
formerly  at  the  edge  of  the  ice  sheet.  The  conditions  and  human  work  are  fully 
stated  by  Dr.  Geikie,  and  connected  with  the  names  of  the  geologic  stages.  With 
these  explanations  the  reader  will  be  guarded  against  assuming  exactness  for  the 
amounts  stated,  which  are  only  approximate  and  relative.  Abbreviations  in  the 
last  column  are  used,  as  Daun.,  for  Daunian ;  Upper  Turb.,  for  Turbarian. 

In  Egypt  there  has  not  been  any  serious  study  of  the  changes  of  level  which 
the  country  has  undergone  in  recent  periods.  The  following  notes  are  only  some 
points  which  have  caught  my  notice  while  doing  other  work  ;  they  arc  given  here 
without  the  least  claim  for  completeness  or  precision,  and  merely  indicate  what  is 
waiting  to  be  recorded.  By  putting  such  a  statement  together  it  will  be  better 
seen  what  meaning  any  other  such  facts  may  have,  and  what  are  the  crucial 
evidences  that  should  be  specially  sought  for  in  future. 

To  begin  with,  the  levels  above  sea  should  be  stated  for  the  Nile  Plain  at  the 
various  places  to  which  we  may  refer,  as  such  have  to  be  added  to  cliff  heights,  in 
order  to  see  the  Telation  to  sea  level.  Sea  =  o,  Cairo  65  feet,  Minieli  1 14  feet, 
Beni  Hasan  117  feet.  Tell  Amarna  129  feet,  Siiit  147  feet,  Sohag  1 77  feet,  Naqadeh 
230  feet,  Luqsor  250  feet,  Esneh  260  feet.  The  italic  names  are  measured  levels, 
with  others  fitted  in  by  proportionate  distance. 

The  earliest  stage  we  can  observe  is  the  heavy  denudation  of  the  Eocene 
limestone  plateau,  shown  by  hillocks  of  crystalline  calcite  standing  up  on  the  top 
surface.  These  must  have  been  formed  at  a  considerable  depth  by  solution  and 
deposition  ;  since  then,  the  higher  and  surrounding  strata  have  all  been  removed, 
exposing  the  less  soluble  crystalline  calcite.  The  great  rainfall  is  also  shown  by 
the  collapse  of  immense  caverns.  At  Tell  Amarna  I  have  traced  a  sudden  dip 
of  strata  of  fully  200  feet  vertical,  which  implies,  probably,  a  greater  height  of 
cavern  below  it,  filled  up  with  fallen  blocks.  All  along  the  Nile  cliffs  there  may  be 
seen  at  intervals,  in  the  miles  of  perfectly  even  strata,  large  collapses  of  some 
hundreds  of  yards  in  length.  Such  features  imply  the  existence  of  great  caverns, 
the  discharge  of  which  mu.st  have  been  at  least  300  feet  below  the  present  Nile 
level ;  this,  therefore,  implies  an  original  gorge  of  the  Nile,  and  sea  level,  as  much 
lower.     This  must  be  put  as  over  300  feet. 

After  all  this  was  consolidated,  and  the  fallen  strata  cemented  into  a  solid 
mass  by  infiltration  and  breccia,  the  Nile  valley  was  widened  so  as  to  cut  a  clean 
section  through  the  collapsed  strata.  This  shows  that  a  great  rainfall  still  continued 
in  the  land.  Two  stages  of  this  early  period  are  seen  in  207,  208.  In  208  the 
denudation  of  the  surfaces  is  seen  as  a  wide,  gently  sloping  valley  of  very  long  and 
gradual  denudation.  The  slope  on  the  left  is  sharply  broken  away  by  a  much  later 
valley,  of  which  a  view  is  given  in  207.  Yet  this  later  valley — of  the  Tombs  of  the 
Kings — belongs  to  the  period  of  erosion  before  the  changes  which  we  next  consider. 

After  this  erosion  of  deep  valleys,  like  207,  a  rise  of  the  sea  then  followed, 
during  which  the  Nile  valley  was  an  estuary ;  rolled  gravels  and  fragments  were 


The  Stone  Age  in  Eg)>pt. 


129 


deposited  as  high  up  as  400  feet,  or  more,  above  the  plain  at  Thebes.  This  is 
shown  by  the  level  silting  up  of  the  Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings.  In  209 
the  level  line  of  filling  is  very  clear ;  above  it  the  hard  limestone  ridges  rise  like 
islands,  below  it  the  channels  have  been  trenched  out  by  later  rainfall.  Another 
view,  higher  up  th*  valley,  212,  shows  this  also — from  side  to  side  of  the  whole  view 
the  level  line  of  silting  up  is  clearly  seen.  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  attribute 
this  to  ponding  of  the  Nile  by  banks  of  detritus  lower  down.     But  as  there  are 


207.    Precipitous   Valley  (of   Kings),    cut 
through  older  denudation  of  surface. 


208. 


Older  Denudation  Valley,  cut  away  on 
Left  by  Precipitous  Valley. 


209.     Above,  Limestone  Cliffs  and  Slopes. 

Middle,  Level  Top  of  Estuarine  Filling  ky  Debris. 

Below,  Slopes  of  Vallies,  Scoured  out  through  Debris. 

marine  deposits  in  the  Nile  valley  known  as  far  south  as  Asyut,  it  is  certain  that 
there  has  been  an  estuary  since  the  present  erosion  of  the  Nile  valley.  An  attempt 
has  been  made  to  attribute  this  valley-filling  to  aerial  denudation,  but  the  uniform 
flat  land  of  the  top  is  against  a  dust-and-torrent  filling,  as  also  is  the  rounded  and 
rolled  state  of  the  debris  and  the  stratification  of  it.  As  there  are  also  indubitable 
evidences  of  the  high  water  level  in  other  parts  of  the  Nile  valley — as  noticed 
below — there  is  no  object  in  straining  to  avoid  the  conclusion  here.  The  rainfall 
which  produced  the  detritus  of  this  filling  material  must  have  been  enormous, 

I 


130 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


as  the  catchment  area  is  only  six  or  eight  square  miles,  entirely  bounded  by  far 
larger  valleys  on  each  side.     This  deposit  implies  a  depression  of  about  650  feet. 

The  great  beds  of  gravel  with  boulders  on  the  top  of  the  hills  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Fayum,  about  4CX)  feet  over  the  sea,  are  perhaps  of  this  age. 

After  this  came  a  fall  of  the  sea  to  at  least  as  low  as  the  present  level.  This 
is  proved  by  the  rain  which  fell  on  the  small  area  of  the  Valley  of  the  Kings, 
ploughing  out  a  wide  and  deep  course  through  the  mass  of  gravel  and  detritus 


Stack  of  Diiuiui,  left  behind  li.j.M   i;:i-  Estuarine 
Filling  of  the  Kings'  Tombs  Valley. 


laid  down  in  the  previous  period.  This  is  finely  shown  by  the  precipitous  stacks 
of  detritus,  as  seen  in  210,  which  remain  standing  in  the  valley.  How  much  the 
sea  fell  below  the  present  level  we  cannot  say. 


■-^^' 

1 
i 

,# 

^< 

f\ 

^^^^^^^^ 

^ 

^^Hr: 

-^^^^^■P 

H 

4 

9 

211.    Bed  of  Indurated  Gravel,  Filling  Gully  in 
Top  of  Limestone  Cliff,  Sohag. 

Next,  there  was  a  great  rise  of  sea.     At  Sohag  on  the  top  of  the  cliffs,  about 
600  feet  high,  are  patches  of  rolled  gravels,  shown  in  211.     These  extend  up  to  the 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


131 


edge  of  the  cliffs,  filling  gullies  in  the  rock  surface.  The  rock  unprotected  by  the 
gravel  is  not  in  the  least  weathered  back  from  the  line  of  the  face  covered  by  the 
gravel.  There  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  smallest  weathering  of  the  rock 
faces  since  the  gravel  was  laid  down.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  refer  this 
gravel  to  the  prevfous  rise  of  sea,  after  which  there  has  been  heavy  rainfall.  The 
whole  height  of  the  Nile  valley  must  have  been  filled  at  the  side  with  gravel  and 
silt  for  it  to  be  possible  to  lay  down  rolled  gravel  along  the  edge  of  a  cliff.  To 
this  same  rise  of  sea  level  belong  little  patches  of  stratified  silt,  seen  clinging  to 
the  rock  gullies  at  the  top  of  the  cliffs  at  Tell  Amarna.  The  Sohag  gravel  is  at 
about  800  feet  over  sea,  the  Tell  Amarna  silt  at  about  500  feet.  Since  then  there 
has  been  no  rock-weathering  and  very  little  rain. 


212.    Above,  Denuded  Limestone  Cliffs  and  Slopes,  Former  Islands. 

Horizon,  Level  Line  of  Top  of  Estuarine  Filling. 

Below,  Valley  cut  through  DisRis  Filling. 

Probably  of  the  same  age  are  the  great  banks  of  debris  washed  out  of  the  side 
valleys,  and  deposited  always  on  the  down-stream  side  in  the  Nile  valley.  Such 
banks  could  only  be  formed  under  water  when  heavy  rains  were  deepening  the 
side  valleys.  The  banks  are  well  seen  at  Beni  Hasan,  where  they  rise  to  about 
300  or  400  feet  over  present  sea.  If  searched  for,  doub^'less  they  could  be  traced 
in  most  districts,  as  I  have  often  noticed  them.  Probably  also  of  this  age  are  the 
gravel  beds  at  the  mouth  of  the  Valley  of  the  Kings,  where  Pitt-Rivers  first  found 
Egyptian  worked  flints  in  position.  They  can  hardly  belong  to  the  first  filling  of 
the  valley  as  no  trace  of  worked  flint  has  been  discoverable  in  that  filling. 

After  this  there  has  been  a  fall  of  the  sea  to  the  present  level,  and  the  Nile 
current,  with  a  little  rainfall,  has  washed  away  the  later  filling  of  the  Nile  valley. 
Though  there  is  some  thirty  or  forty  feet  of  Nile  mud  deposit  in  the  Nile  valley, 
this  does  not  extend  in  the  Delta  below  the  present  sea  level.  The  rise  of  land 
level  by  silting  up  the  bed  of  the  valley  seems  to  have  raised  it  all  along,  and  at 

I  2 


132 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


the  same  time  pushed  out  the  Delta  forward  ;  so  the  actual  front  of  the  deposit  has 
always  been  at  about  the  same  sea  level.  In  saying  this  we  do  not  take  into 
account  the  sinking  of  the  Delta  in  Arab  times. 

On  the  basis  of  the  various  changes  of  sea  level  we  may  now  attempt  to 
connect  the  Egyptian  with  the  European  changes. 


Egypt. 

Europe 

Earliest  prehistoric  civilisation. 

4th  Glacial 

Late  Magdalenian. 

Fayum  flints. 

Solutrean. 

Early  settlements. 

Aurignacian. 

Sea 

3rd  Intergl. 

Mousterian. 

\       Feet. 

Sea  Feet. 

Sohag  cliff  gravels         

...     +  800 

+  700    3rd  Glacial 

Mousterian. 
Acheulian. 

Kings'  Valley  clearing 

...       —       X 

-   600    2nd  Intergl. 

Chellean. 

Kings' Valley  filling      

...     +  650 

+  900     2nd  Glacial 

Collapsed  caverns         

...     -   300 

-   200     1st  Intergl. 

Heidelberg. 

It  accords  with  this  connection,  that  I  have  repeatedly  and  closely  searched 
the  sections  of  the  filling  of  the  Kings'  Valley  for  worked  flints,  and  never  could 
find  any  in  those  beds ;  as  they  are  pre-Chellean  it  is  not  to  be  expected  there 
should  be  such  worked  flints.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  plenty  of  palaeoliths 
on  the  top  of  that  filling. 

In  the  following  diagram,  Fig.  213,  the  extent  of  these  movements  of  sea  level 
is  shown,  with  the  suggestion  of  their  being  contemporary.  The  approximate 
dates  are  placed  at  the  top,  merely  to  give  an  idea  of  the  extent  of  time  involved 


100^000 


80f 


000 


600000  i^Oti^OOa  200  000 

P'^CLACIAL   l*"'lNT.  i^'GLACIAL    a'-'lNTERCL.  3'^CL.5in.46 

+■900 


in  each  change.     The  human  periods  from  the  Heidelberg  man  to  the  Magdalenian 
are  marked  with  the  European  curve.     The  Egyptian  curve  has  no  human  remains 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


133 


yet  known  associated  with  its  first  rise  of  sea  level,  where  they  have  been  searched 
for  in  the  Theban  vale  (Valley  of  Tombs  of  the  Kings).  In  the  second  rise  there 
is  the  rolled  Chellean  implement  of  Esneh  at  about  450  feet  over  present  sea  level, 
implying  that  the  Chellean  age  was  before  the  middle  of  this  rise.  These 
limitations  of  the  "Chellean  age  agree  with  its  position  in  Europe.  In  the  second 
rise  is  here  marked  the  change  from  a  rainy  to  a  dry  climate,  as  indicated  by  the 
entire  absence  of  erosion  since  the  deposit  of  the  high  level  gravel  at  Sohag. 

These  changes  of  level  of  the  sea  imply  great  changes  in  the  coast  outlines. 
In  the  two  sketch  maps  are  shown  what  the  coasts  would  be  with  a  sea  level  of 
600  feet  lower  and  600  feet  higher.  These  are  not  the  extreme  changes,  but  show 
the  conditions  which  would  have  lasted  for  many  thousands  of  years,  becoming 
more,  and  then  less,  pronounced.     In  the  map  during  the  glacial  periods,  214,  an 


open  shading  shows  where  ice  is  considered  to  have  extended.  Central  Europe 
was  an  island  with  deeply  indented  branches  of  Italy  and  the  Balkans.  A  clear 
waterway  went  through  southern  France,  the  Dardanelles,  and  out  into  the 
great  Russian  sea,  in  which  the  Caucasus  and  Urals  stood  as  mountain  boundaries. 
On  the  south  the  African  coast  lay  as  far  back  as  the  latitude  of  Thebes,  marked  T, 
in  the  Nile  valley.  Thus,  westerly  winds  would  bring  precipitation  over  Egypt 
freely  being  first  arrested  by  the  eastern  mountains,  and  so  producing  tributary 
streams  on  the  east  side  of  the  Nile  estuary,  A  clear  waterway  existed  around 
the  Palestine  hills  into  the  Red  Sea.  Such  were  the  conditions  of  the  cold  periods, 
when  Egypt  had  a  climate  like  that  of  Constantinople  or  the  south  of  Japan. 

In  the  warm  periods  favourable  to  man,  when  the  Chellean  and  Solutrean  work 
flourished,  this  coast  line  was  very  different  (Fig.  215).  The  much  more  continental 
condition  must  have  favoured  intercourse,  and  the  spread  of  types  of  work.  At 
the  extreme  low  waters  (here  dotted)  Cyprus  joined  Syria,  Crete  was  a  link  between 
Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  Italy  joined  Africa,  Sardinia  and  Corsica  joined  Italy, 

I  3 


134 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt. 


the  Balearic  Isles  joined  Spain,  and  Spain  joined  Africa,  thus  making  two  closed 
lakes  of  the  Mediterranean.  In  the  north-west  a  great  extent  of  land  entirely 
included  the  British  Isles,  with  a  steep  edge  of  it,  as  steep  as  the  Ligurian  or 
Welsh  coast  at  present.  Thus  the  whole  conditions  of  life  and  of  intercourse  must 
have  been  entirely  different  many  times  during  the  human  period.  What  is 
shown  in  these  maps  are  the  600  feet  contours,  which  were  not  the  extreme 
conditions,  but  such  outlines  as  must  have  lasted  for  a  long  period. 


WARM 
PERIODS 


215. 

We  can  now  realise  what  needs  to  be  looked  for  in  Egypt.  Unhappily,  in 
recent  years,  the  surface  flints  have  been  remorselessly  gathered  up  by  the  cartload 
to  the  order  of  speculators,  and  their  history  and  meaning  entirely  lost.  All  over 
the  Theban  district,  which  was  one  of  the  richest  and  the  most  important  by  the  suc- 
cessive periods  there  traceable,  there  is  not  a  flint  worth  notice  left,  only  sad  little 
pits  dotted  over  the  ground,  where  they  have  lain.  Some  good  and  careful  work 
was  done  by  Mr.  Montague  Porch,  who  levelled  by  aneroid  the  positions  of  the  fine 
series  of  flints  which  he  collected,  and  I  have  always  noted  the  levels  of  the  flints 
which  I  have  picked  up.  A  fine  Acheulian  flint,  with  secondary  working,  lay  by 
a  cliff  edge,  800  feet  high,  at  Naqadeh,  or  at  1,030  over  sea.  This  would  never 
have  been  submerged,  and  no  very  heavy  rainfall  occurred  since  its  time  sufficient 
to  denude  the  rock  and  wash  it  away.  This  accords  with  the  appearance  of  its 
position.  On  the  other  hand  a  well  rolled  Chellean  ^ick  {coup  de  pohig)  I  picked 
up  on  a  spur  of  hill  behind  Esneh,  estimated  at  200  feet  over  Nile,  or  460  over 
sea ;  and  this  is  within  the  submersion  of  the  3rd  glacial  period. 

The  main  matters  to  search  for  now  are  traces  of  raised  beaches  of  the  sub- 
mersions, and  flints  connected  with  them ;  levels  of  waterworn  and  of  unworn  flints 


The  Stone  Age  in  Egypt.  135 

of  each  early  period  at  about  600  feet  over  sea ;  any  worked  flints  in  the  Kings' 
Valley  filling,  or  in  the  banks  of  debris  washed  out  of  side  valleys  at  high  levels  ; 
the  period  (Mousterian  ?)  of  flints  in  the  high  gravels,  and  the  relation  of  Fayum 
flints  to  the  continuous  prehistoric  civilisation.  Of  course,  flints  may  be  found 
perfectly  fresh  arfd  unpatinated  if  they  chanced  to  be  buried  very  soon,  without 
water  wear,  and  have  only  been  uncovered  by  denudation  lately.  Such  was  the 
case  with  one  of  the  rudest  and  most  massive  picks  (Fig.  9),  probably  lost  in  the 
zero  level  period  of  early  Chellean,  and  then  bared  again  in  modern  times  where 
I  found  it,  at  near  Nile  level.  By  far  the  most  important  matter  is  the  levelling  and 
position  of  flints  on  the  slopes  and  ledges  of  the  hills  in  the  Thebaid,  where  there 
was  always  a  land  surface  throughout  all  the  changes  of  level. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


I  4 


(    136    ; 


BOAT   NAMES   IN   EGYPT. 

In  the  Hieratic  Ostrnka  from  the  Ramesseum,  Dr.  Spiegelberg  transcribed  some 
tallies  of  the  boat  loads  of  blocks  of  stone,  brought  down  for  the  building.  The 
sizes  of  the  blocks  in  cubits  were  stated,  and  the  names  of  the  owners  of  the  boats, 
such  as  Pen-tep,  Khoy,  Pa-abtu,  Mohu,  Min-nekht,  Khensu,  Tahuti,  Nekhtu-amen, 
Setmes,  and  others,  sometimes  with  the  father's  name  added.  The  general  load  for 
a  boat  was  six  to  seven  blocks  (see  numbers  135,  136). 


OSTRAKON   FROM   THEBES,   GIVING   NAMES  AND   LOADS   OF  BOATS. 


Here  we  publish  another  Theban  ostrakon  with  various  tally  numbers,  averaging 
also  between  six  and  seven.  These,  therefore,  are  probably  also  tallies  of  the 
delivery  of  boat  loads  of  stone.  The  signs,  however,  are  not  personal  names,  but 
apparently  the  names  or  signs  of  the  boats.  The  writer  was  evidently  not  a  regular 
scribe,  as  he  had  no  habit  of  writing  in  one  direction  ;  he  made  eight  signs  face  the 
right,  in  the  usual  scribe's  direction,  and  six  signs  face  the  left  in  the  European 
direction.  Probably  he  learned  his  signs  from  big  monuments,  on  which  they  face 
either  way  for  symmetry. 


Boat  Names  in  Egypt. 


137 


The  names  and  loads  of  the  boats  are  as  follows,  beginning  at  the  top  and  the 


left  hand : — 


Khepesh 

Qed... 

Mer... 

Uzat 

User 

Her  (Horus) 

Hebs 

Urs  ... 

Anu... 

Khent 

Rannut 

Zu  ?  user 

Shot (papyru 


roll) 


6 

Heb 

14 

Ka     ... 

5 

Anr? 

5 

Uazet 

9 

Het  ?  (temple 

6 

X 

12 

Qenbet 

9 

Ren  pet 

5 

Mena 

S 

Uben  uas 

5 

Hez    ... 

3 

Neit  ... 

5    . 
2 

3 
IS 

3 

3  +  « 
II 

4 
2 
2 

3 
I  +« 


10 


Many  of  these  names  are  much  like  modern  ones  in  the  Navy,  or  the  luggers 
and  barges  of  to-day.  The  Turnabout,  The  Mighty,  The  Powerful,  The  Beloved, 
The  Rest,  The  Harvest,  The  Feast,  The  Glory  of  Thebes,  The  Firm  One,  and  the 
several  names  of  deities,  like  the  Saints  of  the  Spanish  Navy,  are  quite  what  we 
should  expect.  Observe  also  that  nearly  all  of  these  words  are  single  signs  which 
could  be  set  up  as  a  figure-head,  or  painted  large  upon  the  bows. 

This  ostrakon  was  brought  to  me  from  Thebes,  and  is  now  in  University 
College,  London. 


W.  M.  F.  P. 


(     138     ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Zeitschrift  fur  Aegyptische  Sprache,  L,  191 2. 

{Omitted  in  previous  Abstract^ 

1 1.  Spiegelberg,  W. — Brugsch  first  suggested,  and  Sethe  has  proved,  that 

the  Boheiric  AC(|)ori  is  derived  from  the  Egyptian  |    -~  h\t-sp,  the  regnal  year  of 

a  king.  Two  new  examples  from  the  Coptic  are  given  TcnuuTH  and  TcncMxe. 
Here  en-,  which  is  in  the  construct  form,  is  obviously  a  feminine  word,  having  the 
definite  article  and  the  numeral  in  the  feminine. 

12.  ROEDER,  G. — In  the  temple  of  Bet  el-Wali  the  title  of  Rameses  II  is  given 

as    ^^  A~w«  ^  / / 1  "  son  of   Ra   in   truth."     The  indirect  genitive  helps  to 

emphasise  the  filiation  of  the  king. 

13.  Sethe,  K. — In  Spiegelberg's  edition  of  the  Pedubastis  romance  occurs 
a  word  which  looks  like  the  preposition  re-,  but  which  he  translates  as  "  To  happen  " 
and  once  as  "  To  do."  It  can,  however,  only  be  the  qualitative  of  eipe,  o  (Achm.  e-), 
a  word  which  has  hitherto  been  looked  for  in  demotic  in  vain.     In  demotic  also 

there  occurs  the  form  -c2>-  ll  fl ,  the  3rd  pers.  fern.  sing,  of  the  pseudo-participle, 

which  has  not  been  preserved  in  Coptic. 

I  ffA  of  Saitic  and  Ptolemaic  times  is 
.     This,  however,  is  not  correct  as 


14.  DfivAUD,  E. — The  noun   |  "^^  (j 
generally  derived  from  the  verb   |  *^^  (j 
the  word   in  question  derives  from  g(\.     The  verb    |j  ^.0    '  S()  does  not 

occur  later  than  the  Middle  Empire,  nor  is  the  noun   |  ^^  ^      S()  f°""d  before 

the  Saite  Period.  On  the  other  hand  ^^''^^  gA  is  not  used  in  texts  after  the 
second  Theban  Empire.  For  direct  proofs  of  the  identity  of  the  two  words,  see 
Petrie,  Denderah,  8,  '^ ^^^'''*^ ^  ZS  ^^^  ^  ^"^  °"  ^  ^^'^^ ^*^*"^  "'^' 
^t^  I    I  qA  ^\  ,  and  several  others. 


15.  D^VAUD,    E. — A    correction    of  Gardiner's   translation   of  the   sentence 

r^  S^  X-  -^  Zn  1"^  -^  '^n  P  "^  tH^  <^  P'  ^y  changing.^-,  into ; 

when  the  sentence  reads :  "  Giving  falsehood  to  him  who  says  it,  truth  to  him  who 
comes  wjth  it." 

16.  D^VAUD,  E. — The  *^  in  the  verb  LJ  "^^  \m  (Coptic  ei)  is  not  one  of 
the  radicals  of  the  word.  The  two  signs  H  and  Mr  have  the  same  form  in  hieratic, 
and  the  scribe  in  writing  Q  has  had  in  his  mind  ^ ,  of  which  the  phonetic 
complement  is  *^ .     Hence  the  mistake. 


(     139    ) 


REVIEWS. 


I 


The  Tomb  oj  Amenevihet.  Copied  by  NiNA  DE  Garis  Davies  ;  text  by 
Alan  H.  Gardiner.  410,  132  pp.,  46  plates.  (Under  the  auspices  of  the  Egypt 
Exploration  Fund.) 

In  this  volume  is  issued  for  the  first  time  a  detailed  study  of  the  funerary 
system  of  the  Egyptians,  and  we  owe  Dr.  Gardiner  gratitude  for  applying  the 
latest  knowledge  to  the  comprehension  of  the  texts  on  the  subject.  Stimulated 
by  the  excellent  copies  of  Mrs.  Davies,  the  author  has  published  this  admirable 
introductory  volume,  for  which  the  "auspices"  of  any  society  are  needless.  It 
may  be  hoped  that  he  will  give  the  world  many  more  volumes  of  "  The  Theban 
Tomb  Series  "  to  which  this  is  introductory,  and  so  make  accessible  the  mass  of 
detail  which  remains  from  one  great  period  of  civilisation. 

The  tomb  selected  for  this  introductory  volume  is  not  of  historical  interest, 
but  is  chosen  as  giving  ground  for  description  of  the  funerary  system  as  a  whole. 
The  principal  discussions  of  general  matters  are  on  the  hetep  da  nesut  formula,  and 
the  magical  value  of  the  scenes  represented.  The  formula  which  heads  every 
funerary  inscription,  is  by  its  habitual  use  and  brevity  not  easy  to  comprehend. 
The  earliest  sense  of  it  is  concluded  to  be  "  a  boon  which  the  king  gives,"  and 
as  usually  applied  it  becomes  "  an  offering  which  the  king  gives."  The  precedence 
of  the  sign  "  king  "  is  due  only  to  the  usual  rule  of  placing  it  honorifically  first 
in  the  sentence ;  and  the  real  order  is  shown  in  some  of  the  variations  where  gods 
are  named  instead  of  the  king.  The  sense  formerly  suggested  that  it  was  a  prayer 
"may  the  king  give,"  is  set  aside  by  the  syntax,  and  the  variant  erdau,  the 
relative  form.  Why  the  king  should  be  considered  to  give  all  the  sustenance  to 
the  dead,  has  been  generally  explained  by  the  high-priestly  function  of  the  early 
king,  emphasized  in  a  stele  of  the  XVII Ith  dynasty,  where  the  king  actually 
performs  the  family  offering  {Student's  History,  II,  172).  Dr.  Gardiner  prefers, 
however,  the  explanation  that  the  formula  was  originally  that  of  the  royal  burial, 
where  the  living  king  offered  to  his  father,  and  was  thence  transferred — without 
change — to  the  private  usage.  This  is  supported  by  the  parallel  of  the  transference 
of  chapters  of  the  royal  ritual  (Pyramid  Texts)  to  private  use,  and  by  the  expression 
"the  Osiris"  passing  from  the  deified  king  to  his  subjects.  Both  of  these  parallels 
are,  however,  long  after  the  period  of  the  hetep  da  nesut  for  private  persons,  which 
was  in  full  use  in  the  IVth  dynasty,  so  soon  as  there  is  any  bulk  of  monuments  to 
study.  We  may  say  that  there  is  another  sense  to  be  considered  also.  In  early 
society,  as  Dr.  Seebohm  has  shown,  all  property  is  ultimately  vested  in  the  chief 
and  he  grants  the  use  of  it  to  the  actual  holders.  The  chief  sets  up  in  life  each 
youth  with  cattle  or  land-rights,  which  have  to  be  returned  at  his  death  or  in  the 


140  Reviews. 

third  generation  after,  for  redistribution.     Hence  all  property  is  given  by  the  chief 
primarily,  and  only  the  usufruct  of  it  is  personal  property.     When  gifts  are  made 
to  the  dead  they  would  thus  pass  out  of  the  common  fund  which  is  returnable  to 
the  chief,  and  it  would  be  natural  therefore  to  require  his  consent.      The  two 
aspects  of  the  tribal  chief,  as  communal  trustee  and  as  high-priest,  seem  to  fully 
account  for  the  offerings  to  the  dead  being  considered  as  coming  from  the  king. 
It  might  be  thought  that  so  daily  a  matter  as  food  would  not  be  looked  on  as 
tribal  property :  but  the  earliest  of  such  formulae  are  for  a  sarcophagus  and  burial, 
i.e.,  all  the  property  that  was  put  in  the  tomb.     Further,  we  must  remember  that 
the  chief  had  wide-spread  rights  to  food-rents,  or  maintenance,  and  it  might  well 
be  that  the  offerings  were  primitively  granted  out  of  the  food-rent  belonging  to  the 
king,  just  as  parochial  endowments  for  masses  for  the  dead  in  Wales  arose  out  of 
a  dedication  of  the  chiefs  food-rents.     Taking  into  account  these  features  of  tribal 
society,  it  seems  needless  to  resort  to  a  very  early  transfer  of  a  royal  formula.     The 
whole   conception  of  property  and  food  dedicated  to   the   dead   would  seem  to 
require  the  chief's  consent,  and  be  granted  by  him  as  trustee,  and  offered  by  him 
as  priest  of  the  tribe.     Of  the  later  stages  Dr.  Gardiner  says  :  "  From  the  Middle 
Kingdom  onward  these  various  uses  were  confused,  and  a  hybrid  formula  was 
evolved,  the  underlying  idea  of  which  was  a  bargain  struck  between  the  king  and 
certain  gods,  offerings  being  made  to  the  gods  as  an  inducement  to  them  to  give 
similar  offerings  to  the  deceased."     This  is  considered  due  "  to  a  purely  philological 
cause,  namely  the  habit  that  grew  up  "  of  blending  the  phrases,  "  a  boon  which  the 
king  gives  and  which  Anubis  gives"  as  "a  boon  which  the  king  gives,  Anubis." 
It  seems  doubtful  if  the  contracted  writing  could  change  the  whole  conception  of 
the  offering,  and  we  should  rather  look  to  social  and  economic  causes  for   the 
transfer.     If  the  offering  were  made  to  the  god  for  the  benefit  of  the  dead,  then 
the  priesthood  received  it,  and  the  priestly  aggrandisement  of  the  Vth  dynasty  and 
onward  would  urge  on  this  change.     Another  cause  for  bringing  in  the  gods  as 
intermediaries   would    be   the   constant   alienation   of  funerary  endowments ;    by 
consecrating  them  to  the  gods  for  the  dead  the  divine  protection  was  invoked.     It 
was  in  fact  introducing  a  trustee  in  order  to  secure  the  property.     A  good  instance 
is  quoted  where  the  son  is  shown  offering  to  his  parents,  while  above  that  is  shown 
the  king  similarly  offering  to  Osiris  and  Isis.     Thus  the  human  offering  to  the 
human  person  reacts  on  the  divine  offering  to  the  gods,  for  them  to  ensure  it  to 
the  person.     In  the  latest  stage  the  power  of  the  word  was  thought  to  suffice,  and 
the  passer  by  was  desired  to  recite  the  formula  so  as  to  convey  to  the  dead  the 
benefit  of  the  offerings  named. 

The  magical  value  of  the  funerary  scenes  has  been  dwelt  upon  by  Sir  Gaston 
Maspero,  but  denied  by  the  wholly  materialist  school  of  Berlin,  which  regards  them 
as  pompous  display.  In  this,  and  other  points,  the  sympathetic  insight  of  the 
French  school  is  accepted  and  acknowledged  by  Dr.  Gardiner.  The  hidden  texts 
on  the  insides  of  the  coffins,  or  buried  in  the  tomb  chamber,  were  nothing  as 
a  demonstration  to  the  living,  and  they  force  us  to  accept  such  provision  as  .solely 
for  the  magical  benefit  of  the  dead.  Similarly,  we  may  add,  the  hunting  and  fishing 
scenes  in  the  upper  chambers  are  the  evident  descendants  of  those  hunting  scenes 
on  the  prehistoric  grave  at  Hierakonpolis  which  was  never  to  be  visited  by  the 
living.  It  is  only  when  we  reach  the  biographical  inscriptions  that  the  intention  for 
the  living  appears  ;  and  we  should  note  that  these  inscriptions  are  at  first  outside  of 
the  tomb  chapel  (Herkhuf,  and  at  Thebes),  and  only  were  transferred  to  the  inside 
later,  in  order  to  protect  them. 


Reviews.  141 

Many  points  of  general  interest  occur  in  the  description  of  the  tomb.  The 
family  names  are  all  of  the  style  of  the  early  XVIIIth  dynasty  ;  but  a  strange — 
perhaps  foreign — form  is  Aohmes  Hamash,  which  latter  is  supposed  to  be  a  pet 
name  for  Aohmes. 

The  order  of  the  subjects  in  the  tomb,  and  the  reasons  for  their  position, 
orientation,  and  facing  direction,  are  carefully  discriminated,  and  shown  to  be 
strictly  in  accord  with  the  purpose  and  idea  of  the  meaning. 

The  erasure  of  the  seni-pnest  is  noted  as  due  to  the  Aten  movement ;  it  throws 
light  on  the  secondary  features  of  that  religion,  of  which  we  know  but  little.  It 
appears  that  the  priestly  function  was  disliked. 

The  usual  early  figure  of  the  table  of  offerings  is  discussed.  The  view  that  the 
subject  represented  leaves  of  reeds  laid  over  the  offerings,  is  not  supposed  to  be  the 
original  idea,  but  only  an  ignorant  adaptation  by  the  Egyptians,  while  the  original 
objects  are  believed  to  be  a  row  of  sections  of  loaves,  or  slices  of  bread. 

An  interesting  scene  is  described  of  Amenemhet  making  offerings  for  the 
various  craftsmen  employed  on  the  tomb.  This  might  be  taken  as  giving  them 
a  share  in  the  perpetual  magic  benefit  of  the  representations.  But  there  may  be 
a  further  meaning,  when  connected  with  the  foundation  deposits  of  materials  and 
models  of  food  for  workmen.  May  not  these  workmen  have  been  required  to  renew 
the  perpetual  freshness  and  completion  of  the  tomb  paintings  for  the  benefit  of 
Amenemhet  ?  So  just  as  he  fed  them  while  they  made  the  tomb,  so  he  feeds  them 
in  figure  that  they  may  renew  it. 

The  full  extent  of  the  primitive  unfleshing  of  the  body  is  not  only  known  by 
the  references  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (collected  by  Mr.  Wainwright  in  The 
Labyrinth  and  Gerzeh,  pp.  11-13),  but  by  the  ceremony  named  by  Dr.  Gardiner  of 
"fastening  the  jaws  that  were  severed." 

In  two  places  in  the  tomb  it  is  noted  that  some  of  the  women  are  coloured 
pink  instead  of  the  usual  Egyptian  yellow.  There  are  the  two  musicians  and 
several  serving  women  in  the  feast  scene,  and  two  of  the  bearers  of  offerings.  It 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  these  are  northern  or  Syrian  captives.  We  need  a 
study  of  the  extent  to  which  foreign  captives  were  employed  and  represented. 

The  use  of  candles  in  the  ceremonies  shows  that  such  were  customary  in 
Egypt,  though  no  remains  of  them  have  been  found.  The  lighted  candle  repre- 
sented in  the  hand,  on  the  gilt  cartonnage  busts  of  Roman  age,  is,  therefore,  of 
Egyptian  origin. 

There  are  many  other  points  of  external  interest  in  the  book,  beside  the  value 
of  the  general  study  of  the  funerary  ritual  and  system.  A  ie\w  points  the  author 
may  perhaps  reconsider.  A  genealogy  is  printed  with  all  the  names  upside  down  ; 
it  is  far  better  to  arrange  genealogies  in  a  column  to  each  generation,  with  the 
eldest  at  the  top  of  each  column.  On  p.  48,  surely  a  boat  went  from  Beni  Hasan 
up  to  Abydos,  and  not  down.  On  p.  64,  the  stools  cannot  have  been  of  bamboo, 
which  was  unknown  in  Egypt ;  they  appear  to  be  palm-stick  crates,  like  the 
modern  work.  The  cones  on  the  head  are  stated  to  be  entirely  of  scented  ointment ; 
but  the  vase  from  which  they  are  supposed  to  be  taken  is  much  smaller  than  a 
single  cone.  The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  cone  is  of  hair,  like  the  modern 
African  (Ancient  Egypt,  1914,  169),  and  the  scented  ointment  was  put  on  the 
cone,  which  could  afterwards  be  detached  so  as  not  to  saturate  the  wig. 

Of  the  fidelity  and  artistic  quality  of  the  copies  by  Mrs.  Davies  it  is  needless 
to  remark  ;  it  is  well  known  to  all  that  they  cannot  be  surpassed,  and  the  more  of 
the  ancient  work  is  perpetuated  in  this  way  the  better  for  its  future  survival. 


142  Reviews. 

Sieges  de  Pretres. — Par  GEORGES  Daressy.  8  pp.,  I  plate  {Bull.  Inst. 
Franqais  Arch.  Orient.,  Cairo.) 

A  familiar  object  in  the  Saite  and  Ptolemaic  town  ruins  is  the  solid  limestone 
headrest.  The  wooden  pillows  which  are  usual  from  the  pyramid  age  to  the 
XlXth  dynasty  ceased  to  be  made,  and  heavy  limestone  blocks  appear  instead. 
Now  in  the  present  paper  M.  Daressy  has  shown  that  similar  blocks  are  found  up 
to  a  large  size,  and  that  such  were  seats,  as  stated  in  an  inscription.  On  the 
strength  of  that  he  terms  all  such  blocks  as  seats,  and  would  regard  the  lesser 
sizes  as  votive  seats.  It  seems  more  likely  that  the  low  blocks  of  only  six  or 
seven  inches  high,  and  not  much  more  in  length,  were  headrests ;  especially  as  they 
curve  up  sharply  at  the  ends,  to  prevent  the  head  rolling  over,  while  such  a  form 
prevents  sitting  upon  them.  Another  feature  is  the  hollowing  out  of  the  side, 
which  is  useless  for  a  seat,  but  adapted  for  the  shoulder  in  lying  down.  One  such 
block  from  Memphis  had  a  little  shrine  cut  in  it  to  hold  a  figure  or  amulet 
{Meydum  and  Memphis,  III,  PI.  XXXIII);  this  would  be  more  appropriate  for 
sleeping  on  to  influence  dreams,  than  for  sitting  upon. 

While  the  commoner  small  blocks  are  therefore  headrests,  the  larger  blocks 
described  are  now  shown  to  be  seats.  Two  were  found  at  Karnak,  one  of 
sandstone,  the  other  of  red  granite,  about  eighteen  inches  high  and  wide,  and  a  foot 
thick.  The  sandstone  seat  has,  on  the  larger  face  of  it,  an  inscription  of  ten 
columns,  carefully  cut  and  painted  blue.     It  is  translated  as  follows  : — 

"  The  prophet  of  Amen-ra  king  of  the  gods ;  prophet  of  Horus  the  great 
one  of  both  lands,  great  ....  of  Amen ;  first  prophet  of  the  image  of  Pharaoh 
ever  living  ;  prophet  of  Osiris,  of  Ptah-Sokar-Osiris  of  Koptos  in  the  Hall  of  Gold, 
of  Horus,  of  Isis,  of  Nephthys  and  their  allies,  ruler  of  the  temple  of  Khonsu 
Nefer-hetep  of  Thebes ;  priest  of  Min  in  the  House  of  the  Elder  ;  fourth  prophet 
of  Amen  ;  opener  of  the  door  of  Amhut,  passing  in  his  skin  ;  the  great  ruler  {ha), 

keeper  of and  of  the  king  of  the  gods  in  his  time  ;  second  prophet,  making 

the  passes  of  Osiris,  chief  of  the  modelling  of  his  form,  divine  father,  initiate  in  the 

mysteries,   sacred   purifier,    IMHOTEP  .  .  (son   of) sacred   purifier   of  the 

temple  of  Mentu  lord  of  Thebes  in  the  temple  of  the  bull  (Bakis),  HORUZA.  He 
says,  in  adoring  his  lord,  (I  was  installed)  in  my  seat  among  the  chief  prophets  in 

the  place  of  the  great  purification  as  instructor- in-chief  of  those on  the 

seat ;  making  the  passes  on  the  eyes,  in  alternation,  the  companion  did  things 
without  knowing.  He  knew  also  that  the  love  of  Amen  was  better  than  millions 
of  things,  than  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pieces  of  silver.  He  has  been  consecrated 
to  Tanen  as  his  prophet,  and  to  Isis  as  priest  of  the  sycomores.  He  satisfies 
himself  with  truth,  he  lives  with  Her,  his  heart  rests  in  the  great  purification. 
I  look  for  help  to  transmit  to  my  ka  all  the  members  fulfilling  their  functions,  and 
to  end  my  days  on  earth  in  the  service  of  Amen  as  director  of  the  prophets  in  his 
great  temple."  Of  the  notes  of  M.  Daressy  on  this  inscription  most  are  technical ; 
but  he  compares  the  "  passes  on  the  eyes,"  and  effect  on  the  subject,  to  modern 
hypnotic  action. 

Coptic  Cloths. — By  Laura  Start.  8vo,  36  pp.,  38  figures,  i  plate.  2s.  Sd. 
by  post.     (Bankfield  Museum,  Halifax.) 

This  pamphlet  describes  the  different  styles  followed  during  about  a  thousand 
years  in  Egypt.  A  careful  analysis  is  given  of  the  methods  of  weaving,  and  of 
constructing  the  patterns  by  direct  shuttle,  by  hand-working  on  the  warp  threads, 
and  by  stitching  after  the  woof  is   complete.     The   method   of  weaving  cloth 


Reviews.  143 

specially  for  the  form  of  garments,  and  of  hemming  and  stitching  such  garments, 
is  described  and  illustrated.  Such  technical  descriptions  and  explanations  are 
much  needed  in  order  to  understand  the  complex  development  of  ancient  crafts, 
and  their  relation  to  modern  work.  A  study  like  this  at  once  adds  life  and  value 
to  collections,  wlftch  otherwise  are  merely  a  subject  of  ignorant  wonder  to  the  usual 
antiquary  or  excavator.  Anyone  who  wishes  to  understand  the  subject  should  get 
this  account  and  study  it. 

The  writer  does  not  touch  on  the  origin  of  the  embroidery  patches  on  Coptic 
garments,  which  seem  to  be  utilitarian  to  prevent  wear  and  tear.  The  two  main 
pieces  are  large  ovals  at  the  knees,  then  lesser  ovals  over  the  breasts,  and  broad 
stripes  across  the  shoulders.  Whether  darning  or  patching  the  wear  originated  the 
use  of  embroidery  on  those  parts,  or  whether  the  decoration  was  put  on  as 
a  preventive,  we  do  not  yet  know. 

The  reader  should  correct  two  serious  misprints  :  on  p.  4  the  warp  threads  are 
140  not  540  to  the  inch ;  and  on  p.  32,  in  the  first  column  of  dates,  1738  should  be 
put  to  the  XVI  Ith  dynasty. 

Culture  of  the  Ancient  Pueblos  of  .  . .  New  Mexico  and  Arizona. — By  Walter 
Hough.  Smithsonian  Institution,  Bulletin  87.  1914.  133  pp.,  29  plates,  348 
figures. 

Though  purely  American,  this  account  contains  some  interesting  parallels  to 
Egyptian  products.  There  is  an  extensive  system  of  dedicating  offerings  of  all 
kinds  to  the  gods,  and  placing  such  offerings  in  caves,  where  they  have  been  long 
preserved.  Such  objects  are  called  paho.  The  palios  described  are  of  twigs,  hooked 
sticks,  bows  and  arrows,  bird  carvings,  feathers,  fire,  cigarettes,  fire-sticks,  dress, 
model  baskets  and  flutes.  Those  which  are  of  more  interest  to  us  are  the  models 
of  animals  roughly  pinched  up  in  clay  (Figs.  260-275),  exactly  like  the  model 
animals  found  at  Kahun,  where  they  were  apparently  toys  made  by  children  {see 
p.  165,  Vol.  1914).  Another  curious  parallel  is  in  the  reed  gaming  sticks  or  dice, 
which  are  long  slips  split  off  a  reed,  with  the  knots  painted,  the  throw  being 
determined  by  whether  the  slip  fell  inside  or  outside  uppermost.  This  is  exactly 
what  was  found  carved  in  ivory  in  the  tomb  of  King  Qa  {Royal  Tombs,  I,  xvii,  30, 
p.  23),  and  like  the  slips  of  reed  used  in  gaming  in  Egypt  at  present.  All  such 
usages  similar  to  those  in  Egypt  serve  to  illustrate  the  mode  of  thought  and  the 
use  of  objects. 


(     144     ) 


NOTES    AND   NEWS. 


The  war  naturally  overshadows  every  other  care  and  activity.  We  can  only  hope 
to  keep  the  constructive  interests  alive  for  the  present,  so  that  they  may  revive 
again  after  the  scourge  on  civilisation  may  be  ended.  Mr.  Brunton  and  Dr.  Amsden 
are  at  their  posts  still,  at  Netley  and  Cooden  Beach.  Mr.  Engelbach,  after  his 
recent  marriage,  is  daily  expecting  to  be  sent  abroad  from  Sheerness.  Mr.  Angelo 
Hayter  is  now  in  the  censorship  of  letters.  Mr.  Duncan  Willey  has  found  a  fit 
scope  for  his  Arabic  as  Assistant  Political  Officer  to  the  High  Commissioner  in  the 
Persian  Gulf. 

The  Egyptian  collection  at  University  College,  London,  has  been  partly 
arranged  during  the  winter,  and  will  be  thrown  open  to  the  public,  in  lieu  of  the 
usual  Exhibition  at  the  College,  for  a  month  from  June  7.  After  that  it  will 
continue  to  be  accessible  to  the  public  on  application.  The  facility  of  study  with 
a  library  and  collection  side  by  side,  may,  we  hope,  carry  out  the  intentions  of 
Miss  Edwards  in  establishing  that  centre  for  the  subject.  We  hope  in  our  next 
number  to  give  readers  a  sketch  of  the  scope  of  the  collection,  and  some  views  of  it. 


THE   PORTRAIT. 


The  charming  head  of  a  limestone  statuette,  which  we  give  in  this  number,  was 
one  of  the  treasured  acquisitions  of  Dr.  Capart  at  the  Brussels  Museum  ;  we  hope 
that  he  may  long  continue  to  guard  it  there.  It  represents  a  high  class  Egyptian, 
doubtless  of  Thebes,  at  the  close  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  A  comparison  of  the 
treatment  of  the  face — especially  the  lips — with  the  statue  of  Tutonkhamen  {Arts 
and  Crafts,  Fig.  38)  shows  that  it  comes  from  the  same  period  and  schools,  we 
may  almost  say  from  the  same  artist.  It  has  much  of  the  Syrianised  refinement 
of  type  in  profile,  but  is  not  so  light  and  graceful.  In  front  view  it  shows  a  curious 
heaviness  in  the  width  about  the  ears.  The  eye  is  small  compared  with  the  usual 
type,  and  is  even  smaller  than  the  modern  English  proportion.  These  features 
give  an  air  of  dogged  reserve  which  is  unusual,  and  hardly  accords  with  the  freedom 
of  the  mouth.  It  is  clearly  a  strict  portrait  as  it  departs  from  the  usual  type,  so 
familiar  in  the  works  of  that  age.  The  piercing  of  the  ears  for  wearing  ear  studs 
was  then  a  fashion,  seen  in  the  statues  of  Akhenaten  and  Rameses  ;  yet,  strange  to 
say,  we  have  no  male  head  shown  with  the  ear  studs,  which  only  appear  on  a  few 
statuettes  and  coffins  of  women. 


The  Annual   Exhibition   at  University  College   will   be  open 
June  7  to  July  3,  10  to  5;  Evenings  of  June  10,  15,  and  25,  7  to  8.30. 


1^ 


^ 


HEAD    OF    AN     OFFICIAL.     XVIIITH     DYNASTY, 
IN     LIMESTONE.  BRUSSELS     MUSEUM. 


y 


,u 


U( 


\ 


HEAD     OF    AN     OFFICIAt.,     XVIIITH     DYNASTY, 
IN     LIMESTONE.  BRUSSELS     MUSEUM. 


t 


WOODEN     STATUETTES    OF    SENUSERT     I.,     FROM     LISHT. 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


EXCAVATIONS   AT  THE   SOUTH   PYRAMID  OF   LISHT    IN   1914. 

REPORT   FROM    THE    METROPOLITAN    MUSEUM,    NEW   YORK. 

The  programme  of  work  carried  out  at  the  Pyramids  of  Lisht  by  the  Museum 
Expedition  during  the  season  of  1913-14  consisted  of  two  parts:  (i)  that  at  the 
North  Pyramid,  and  (2)  that  at  the  South  Pyramid,  which  is  of  King  Sesostris 
(Senusert)  I,  of  the  Xllth  dynasty. 

As  the  work  progressed,  we  exposed  first  two  small  pyramids  lying  between 
the  inner  and  outer  enclosure-walls  of  the  pyramid  (see  Fig.  i),  both  of  them 
stripped  of  their  outer  casing-blocks,  the  western  one  constructed  with  a  core  of 
small,  roughly  cubical  blocks  of  limestone,  the  eastern  one  with  a  core  of  sun-dried 
brick  which  had  originally  been  encased  with  limestone.  The  entrance-passage 
of  the  small  stone-pyramid  was  opened  by  the  French  Expedition  and  found  to 
have  been  completely  plundered  in  ancient  times.  The  entrance  to  the  other  small 
pyramid  was  about  2  m.  square,  descending  perpendicularly  through  the  bed-rock 
of  the  plateau  to  a  depth  of  about  1 5  m.,  where  a  passage  led  off  diagonally  north- 
east to  a  chamber  appro.ximately  under  the  centre  of  the  pyramid.  The  filling  of 
the  shaft  consisted  of  Nile  mud  packed  down  so  hard  that  the  implements  of  our 
workmen  could  with  diflSculty  be  driven  into  it,  thus  showing  the  great  length  of 
time  that  it  had  lain  undisturbed  ;  but  the  presence  of  broken  pottery  vessels  and 
other  material  in  the  filling  at  various  points  prepared  us  for  the  result  which  we 
finally  derived — the  chamber  had  been  completely  plundered  at  some  ancient 
period. 

Of  the  limestone  casing  with  which  the  mud-brick  core  of  this  pyramid  was 
originally  covered,  and  also  of  the  platform  of  limestone  blocks  upon  which  the 
structure  had  rested,  a  sufficient  amount  remained  to  render  it  certain  that  the 
pyramid  had  had  a  chapel  on  its  eastern  side  toward  the  Nile  valley,  while  under 
the  platform  there  was  found  at  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  pyramid  a 
"  foundation-deposit."  These  were  practically  identical  in  character  and  in  each 
instance  had  been  placed  in  a  square  pocket  about  80  cm.  in  diameter  and  i  metre 
in  depth,  excavated  in  the  bed-rock  upon  which  the  platform  rested.  The  bottom 
of  the  pocket  had  been  covered  in  each  case  with  about  5  cm.  of  clean  gravel  upon 
which  were  some  twenty-five  to  thirty  small  pottery  model  dishes  and  vases,  while 
scattered  among  them  were  a  number  of  small  lozenge-shaped  blue  glazed  beads. 
On  these  objects  were  laid  the  skull  and  some  of  the  bones  of  an  ox  which  had 
been  sacrificed  as  a  part  of  the  ceremonial.  The  pocket  had  then  been  completely 
filled  with  gravel  in  which,  at  about  half  its  depth,  was  laid  a  small  model  brick  of 
sun-dried  Nile  mud.  Finally  the  pockets  were  covered  by  massive  limestone  blocks 
which  in  each  case  formed  the  corner  blocks  of  the  pyramid-platform.^ 

'  This  is  precisely  like  the  deposits  of  the  second  pyramid  of  Lahun  (W.  M.  F.  P.). 

K 


146 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in   1914. 


As  our  work  progressed  to  the  eastward  beyond  the  outer  enclosure-wall  of 
the  Pyramid  of  Sesostris,  a  large  mastaba-tomb  was  disclosed  situated  in  the  angle 
formed  by  the  enclosure-wall  and  the  temple-causeway,  of  one  of  the  great  officials 
of  Sesostris,   "  The   Hereditary   Prince  and    Count,   Treasurer,    High    Priest    of 


S  ^Pymmid^temple 

Of  Sesostris  I. 

AND  ADJAONT  AflU 

AT  LlSHT 


Fig.  I.    Temple  of  Sknusert  I  at  Lisht,  with  surrounding  Walls  and  Tombs. 

Heliopolis,  Priest  of  Horus,  Priest  of  Min,  Chief  Scribe  of  Divine  Records, 
Superintendent  of  Land,  Superintendent  of  all  works,  the  King's  Favourite,  Great 
in  his  office,  Imhotep." 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  1914. 


147 


As  our  excavation  of  the  ground  around  the  tomb  of  Imhotep  proceeded,  the 
section  immediately  south  of  the  tomb,  including  its  enclosure-wall  on  that 
southern  side,  began  to  yield  evidence  of  particular  interest.  Along  the  outer 
(southern)  side  of  the  wall  the  excavations  were  carried  below  the  original  surface 
level  at  the  time>f  the  construction  of  the  wall  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  and  at  the 
points  marked  A  and  B  on  the  plan  in  Fig.  i  there  were  found  two  divine  barks,  each 
about  275  m.  (9  feet)  in  length.  A  photograph  of  that  at  A  is  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
In  shape  it  was  of  the  "  papyrus  form  "  type  with  straight  rising  prow  and  recurving 
stern,  its  body  fashioned  from  a  solid  log  of  wood,  with  the  prow  and  stern  posts 
dowelled  to  it.     The  rails  along  the  deck  were  likewise  attached  by  dowels.     The 


Fig.  2.    Ceremo.nial  Boat  Buried  beside  Enclosure  Wall. 

gunwales  where  the  rails  stood  bore  traces  of  red,  though  no  evidences  of  painting  were 
preserved  on  other  parts  of  the  boat.     It  was  in  an  excellent  state  of  preservation. 

The  second  boat,  at  B  on  the  plan,  was  of  the  same  form  but  was  constructed 
of  light  boards  or  slats  and  was  in  too  disintegrated  a  condition  to  be  removed. 
The  prow,  however,  showed  evidence  of  having  been  painted  in  stripes  of  blue, 
green,  and  red. 

Following  the  discovery  of  these  boats,  our  excavations  on  the  inner  or 
northern  side  of  the  enclosure-wall  near  by  brought  to  light,  at  the  point  marked  C 
on  the  plan  (Fig.  i),  remains  of  two  other  boats  of  a  rarely  occurring  type  known 
as  solar  barks.  The  remains  consisted  of  two  prow  and  stern  posts,  together  with 
two  complete  sets  of  the  symbolical  or  magical  objects  which  occur  upon  the  decks 
of  boats  of  this  kind,  as  on  that  in  the  Cairo  Museum. 

K  2 


148 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  1914. 


For  some  days  as  we  had  been  clearing  this  section  of  ground  our  basket  boys 
had  been  running  over  the  enclosure  wall  to  dump  into  the  cars  just  outside,  and 
the  fact  that  a  crack  had  remained  open  in  spite  of  the  dust  and  dirt  constantly 
falling  from  their  baskets  finally  attracted  attention.  As  no  one  had  ever  known 
or  thought  of  the  existence  of  antiquities  in  the  heart  of  a  mud-brick  enclosure- 
wall,  I  was  entirely  unprepared  for  the  sight  that  met  my  eye  when  I  threw  the 
light  of  an  electric  lamp  down  through  the  opening  in  the  brickwork.  As  far  as 
the  size  of  the  crack  allowed  me  to  see,  there  appeared  to  be,  close  below, 
a  chamber  of  moderate  size,  while  immediately  under  the  opening  I  looked  down 


Fig.  3. 


A.  Position  of  Boat,  Fio.  2.     B.  Skconu  Boat.     C.  Place  of  Two  oihek  Boats. 
D.  Chamber  with  Statuettes,  in  the  Wall. 


on  the  tops  of  two  wooden  statuettes,  each  wearing  a  royal  crown,  one  the  white 
crown  of  Upper  Egypt,  the  other  the  red  crown  of  Lower  Egypt.  Beyond  this, 
I  could  not  see  much  of  the  detail  of  the  figures  or  whether  the  chamber  contained 
anything  besides  the  statuettes. 

As  it  was  then  about  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  and  nothing  could  be  done 
before  darkness  to  investigate  further,  about  a  dozen  of  our  workmen  were  detailed 
to  spend  the  night  there  as  guards.  Early  the  following  morning  the  work  of 
investigation  was  taken  up  in  earnest  and  photographs  were  first  made  of  the  actual 
state  of  the  wall  (see  Fig.  3).  It  was  impossible  to  see  what  the  nature  of  the 
roofing  of  the  chamber  was  and,  for  fear  that  any  attempt  to  remove  the  brickwork 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  19 14. 


149 


above  the  chamber  might  result  in  the  collapse  of  the  roofing  upon  the  objects 
below,  it  seemed  best  to  begin  to  remove  the  bricks  at  a  point  beyond  the  extent 
of  the  chamber  and  so,  working  in  to  it  from  the  side,  determine  the  character  of 
its  roofing.  This  finally  showed  the  roofing  to  consist  of  boards,  which  spanned 
the  chamber  andrsupported  the  courses  of  bricks  laid  across  them  above.  As  the 
boards  were  in  sound  condition,  it  was  then  possible  to  remove  the  brickwork 
above  them  and  finally  the  board-roofing  itself.  The  chamber  proved  to  be  about- 
65  cm.  (26  inches)  square,  and  approximately  the  same  in  height,  its  sides  and 
bottom  being  lined  with  a  pinkish-coloured  plaster  (Fig.  4).  At  the  back  against 
its  western  end  stood  the  two  royal  figures,  side  by  side  and  facing  eastward. 
Each  was  in  its  proper  position  in  relation  to  the  division  of  the  country  which  it 


l"iG.  4.     Chamber  with  Shrine  and  Statuettes. 

represented,  that  as  king  of  Upper  Egypt  (Fig.  7)  to  the  south,  that  of  Lower 
Egypt  to  the  north  (see  portrait  at  end).  In  front  of  them  and  occupying  most  of 
the  remaining  part  of  the  chamber  was  a  wooden  shrine.  Apparently  at  the  period 
when  the  wall  had  been  stripped  and  before  it  had  become  buried  under  the 
drifting  desert  sand,  enough  dirt  and  moisture  had  entered  the  chamber  through 
the  roofing  to  form  a  hard  packed  layer  over  the  floor  to  a  depth  of  about  10  cm. 

The  statuettes,  which  were  of  cedar,  were  identical  in  pose  and  of  practically 
the  same  size,  that  with  the  white  crown  measuring  56  cm.  (22  inches),  the  other 
wearing  the  red  crown  58  cm.  (23  inches)  in  height.  They  represented  the  king, 
nude  except  for  a  short  white  skirt  falling  from  the  waist  to  the  knees,  standing  in 
a  vigorous  attitude  with  the  left  foot  advanced,  and  grasping  with  his  extended 
left  hand  the  Hk  sceptre.  To  represent  the  skirt  in  each  case,  a  thin  layer  of 
stucco  had  been  applied  to  the  wood  and  then  painted,  the  folds  of  the  skirt  being 

K  3 


I50 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  1 9 14. 


denoted  in  fine  red  lines.  In  the  same  way  the  crowns  were  treated  with  stucco 
and  painted.  The  nude  parts  of  the  figures  bore  traces  of  having  been  represented 
in  a  pinkish  flesh  colour  applied  directly  on  the  wood,  and  the  eyes  also  had  been 
painted.     (See  frontispiece^ 

In  the  delicacy  and  subtlety  of  their  modelling,  these  figures  exhibit  finer 
qualities  in  sculpture  than  anything  previously  known  from  this  period  of  the 
Middle  Kingdom.  The  rendering  of  the  features  and  of  the  muscular  development 
of  the  body,  as  well  as  the  treatment  of  such  details  as  the  ears,  hands,  and  feet, 
prove  more  clearly  than  some  of  the  larger  sculptures  of  the  same  dynasty— as  for 
example  the  series  of  life-size  seated  statues  of  the  same  king  also  from  Lisht  and 
now  in  the  Cairo  Museum — that  Middle  Kingdom  sculpture  at  its  best  has  lost 


Fig.  5.    Wooden  Shrine  closed. 


Fig.  6.    Wooden  Shrine  oi'EN. 


neither  the  virility  nor  the  realism  of  the  work  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  but  with  these 
has  acquired  certain  refinements  and  subtleties  of  modelling  which  remove  it  from 
the  archaism  of  the  earlier  work.  Although  these  statuettes  are  uninscribed,  yet 
they  must  obviously  represent  Sesostris  I,  whom  Imhotep  served  in  life  and  near 
whorri  he  was  buried. 

To  describe  now  the  remaining  object  in  the  chamber — the  shrine  (Fig.  5), 
made  of  wood  and  painted  yellow,  was  of  the  usual  shape  with  curved  top  and  had 
double  doors  fastened  by  the  regulation  form  of  wooden  bolt  sliding  in  three 
copper  staples.  It  measured  587  cm.  {2.y\  inches)  in  height,  3r5  cm.  (ir4  inches) 
in  width,  and  22'5  cm.  (8'9  inches)  in  depth.  Our  natural  supposition  was  that  it 
must  contain  the  figure  of  some  divinity,  but  when  the  bolt  was  thrown  back  and 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  1914. 


I5t 


its  doors  opened  it  held  an  object 
of  which  the  significance  was 
not  at  first  apparent.  (See  Fig.6.) 
This  was  an  alabaster  ointment 
vase,  of  a  shape  common  to  the 
Middle  Kingdom,  9  cm.  (3^ 
inches)  high  and  10  cm.  (4  inches) 
in  diameter  at  the  top.  The  vase 
was  about  two  thirds  full  of  a 
bluish-coloured  ointment,  now 
completely  hardened,  in  which 
was  immersed  a  cedar  rod,  about 
53  cm.  (21  inches)  in  length 
and  r5  cm.  in  diameter  at  the 
point  where  it  entered  the  oint- 
ment. Except  for  a  few  centi- 
metres above  this  point,  where 
it  was  bare,  the  rod  was  com- 
pletely enveloped  in  a  linen 
covering  carefully  sewed  on  with 
fine  stitches  down  one  side  and 
then  carried  around  a  prong-like 
projection  from  the  lower  part  of 
the  rod. 

The  floor  of  the  shrine  was 
covered  with  the  dried  shells  of 
hundreds  of  small  beetles  which 
had  attacked  the  covering  in 
antiquity  and  eaten  away  its 
upper  part  sufficiently  to  expose 
the  top  of  the  rod,  which  was 
knob-like  in  shape.  From  the 
bulky  appearance  of  the  covering 
it  seemed  as  if  it  must  include 
something  more  than  the  slender 
rod. 

With  the  removal  of  the 
outer  covering,  a  regular  process 
of  bandaging  appeared,  the 
bandages  as  they  were  unwound 
proving  to  run  in  much  the  same 
fashion  as  that  employed  in  the 
wrapping  of  a  mummy,  one 
wound  around  from  right  to  left 
and  one  from  left  to  right,  in 
spiral  fashion  up  and  down,  while 
small  pads  of  linen  soon  began 
to  appear  among  the  bandages 
to  fill  out  the  corners  of  some 
object  which  it  was  now  apparent 


P'iG.  7.    Statuette  of  Senusert  I 

AS  King  of  Upper  Egypt. 

Cairo  Museum. 

K 


152 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in  1914. 


had  been  wrapped  against  the  rod.  Altogether,  thirty-three  bandages  and  pads 
proved  to  have  been  used  in  the  process,  and  finally  the  object  thus  wrapped 
against  the  rod  was  found  to  be  a  "dummy"  animal — made  of  wadded  linen 
cloth  covered  with  skin  having  fine,  short  hair.  This  representation  of  an 
animal  had  also  been  wrapped  with  linen  bandages  before  it  had  been  wrapped 
against  the  rod,  and  was  represented  with  the  head  cut  off,  the  neck  and  fore  legs 
hanging  down.     (See  Fig.  8.) 

The  significance  of  the  contents  of  the  shrine  then  became  apparent — it  held 
the  only  known  example  of  the  "  Anubis-symbol,"  the  emblem  or  symbol  of  the 


Fig.  8.    Anubis  Sy.mbol  u.nwrapped, 

ON     STICK     STANDING     IN     ALABASTBR     JAR. 


god  Anubis  who  presided  over  the  embalming  and  served  as  the  protector  of  the 
mummy.  As  pictured  on  the  monuments  it  occurs  occasionally  as  the  symbol  of 
Osiris  also,  probably  through  a  confusion  of  the  functions  of  the  two  deities,  but  in 
either  case  it  is  of  the  same  form  and  identical  with  the  example  we  now  have. 

This  series  of  objects— the  shrine  and  its  sacred  symbol,  the  royal  statuettes, 
the  divine  barks,  and  finally  the  solar  barks — is  unique  both  in  character  and  in 
the  manner  of  its  occurrence.     It  has  added  an  interesting  and  important  chapter 


\ 


Excavations  at  the  South  Pyramid  of  Lisht  in   1914.  153 

to  our  knowledge  of  Egyptian  funerary  archaeology  in  the  Middle  Kingdom,  but 
at  the  same  time  it  presents  new  problems  which  can  be  hardly  touched  upon  within 
the  scope  of  this  report. 

Near  the  gateway  of  the  enclosure  there  was  also  found  an  object  of  much 
interest  which  luid  evidently  been  dropped  by  some  plunderer  as  he  was  leaving 
the  cemetery.  This  was  an  ushabti-box,  with  its  ushabti,  which  had  belonged  to 
the  Prince  Wehnefer-hetep.  The  box,  which  was  of  the  same  shape  as  the  coffins 
of  this  period,  rectangular  with  curved  lid,  was  painted  red  and  ornamented  with 
bands  of  gold-leaf  on  which  inscriptions  were  painted  in  blue.  One  band  extended 
down  the  centre  of  the  lid,  another  horizontally  around  the  sides  of  the  box  near 
the  top,  while,  from  the  latter,  shorter  perpendicular  bands  ran  down  the  corners 
and  the  sides.     On  one  side  was  the  usual  eye-panel  found  on  the  coffins. 

The  ushabti  itself  was  wrapped  in  linen  bandages  like  a  mummy  and  was 
lying  on  its  left  side  with  the  face  to  the  back  of  the  eye-panel,  in  the  same 
position  in  which  the  body  was  placed  in  the  coffin  at  this  time.  When  unwrapped, 
the  ushabti  was  found  to  be  of  wood  completely  covered  with  gold-leaf,  except  for 
the  wig,  which  was  of  blue  stucco.  On  the  front  of  the  ushabti  an  inscription  was 
painted  in  blue,  in  horizontal  lines,  which  was  of  the  regular  character  that  occurs 
on  ushabtis  of  the  Empire  and  later  periods.  The  occurrence  of  the  inscription  is 
noteworthy  because  this  regular  form  of  ushabti  inscription  is  rarely  met  with 
during  the  Middle  Kingdom. 

Albert  M.  Lythgoe. 


(     154     ) 


A    THIRD    CENTURY    STATUETTE    IN    THE    VICTORIA    AND 

ALBERT  MUSEUM. 


Some  little  time  ago,  The  Burlington  Magazine  published  a  note  by  Prof.  Lethaby 
upon  an  exceedingly  interesting  little  Mother  and  Child  in  wood.  Although  this 
statuette  has  been  for  some  years  in  our  National  Collection  in  the  Victoria  and 
Albert  Museum,  it  had  never  before  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Art  world. 

Together  with  other  objects,  it  was  presented  to  the  Museum  in  1897  by  the 
Egypt  Exploration  Fund ;  and  being  then  described  as  possibly  the  Virgin  and 
Child,  Prof.  Lethaby  was  led  to  ask,  was  it  not  perhaps  "  The  Oldest  Statuette  of 
the  Madonna."  Whatever  the  subject,  there  is  no  doubt  of  its  exceeding  interest 
as  a  relic  of  the  art  of  woodcarving,  transitional  between  the  Hellenism  of  the 
Ptolemaic  period,  and  the  later  movement  towards  the  grave  and  formal  ideals  of 
Byzantine  and  Coptic  art. 

The  Professor's  article  was  in  a  sense  tentative :  written  with  the  view  of 
ascertaining  whether  this  was  indeed  the  oldest  statuette  of  the  Madonna,  or 
merely  a  doll.  A  letter  by  the  present  writer  appeared  subsequently,  in  which  it 
was  sought  to  show  that,  in  view  of  the  assigned  date  and  place  of  discovery,  it 
was  perhaps  rather  a  statuette  of  Isis  and  Horus.  An  answering  letter  from  the 
Professor  accompanied  this,  in  which  he  seemed  quite  prepared  to  forego  the 
Madonna  hypothesis  in  favour  of  his  previously  advanced  Doll  theory. 

The  matter  being  scarcely  more  advanced  by  this  correspondence,  it  would  be 
a  matter  for  regret  if  so  unique  an  object  should  again  drop  into  oblivion  without 
at  least  an  attempt  to  clear  away  the  doubts  respecting  it.  The  first  question  that 
naturally  arises,  is,  "  Can  the  date  ascribed  to  the  statuette  be  accepted  as 
conclusive?"  In  order  to  place  this  beyond  reasonable  doubt  we  must  remember 
whence  it  came,  and  by  whom  it  was  probably  unearthed. 

Behneseh — the  place  of  discovery — is  a  small  village  situated  on  the  west  of  the 
desert,  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  south  of  Cairo.  It  is  the  site  of  the  ancient 
city  of  Oxyrhynchus,  the  capital  of  the  Oxyrhynchite  Nome  in  those  days.  In  the 
Autumn  of  1896  Prof.  Petrie  went  out  to  Behneseh,  arriving  there  at  the  beginning 
of  December.  Messrs.  Grenfell  and  Hunt  followed,  arriving  on  December  the  20th. 
Before  the  advent  of  the  latter  gentlemen,  Petrie  had  superintended  the  erection 
of  huts  for  the  party,  and  made  a  preliminary  survey,  digging  for  about  a  week  on 
the  site  of  the  Graeco-Roman  cemetery.  When  Messrs.  Grenfell  and  Hunt  joined 
him  he  handed  over  the  direction  of  affairs  to  them  and  proceeded  himself  farther 
afield.   '• 

It  was  after  his  departure  that  the  bulk  of  the  work  of  excavation  was  carried 
out,  and  our  statuette  was  turned  up  during  the  operations  of  Messrs.  Grenfell  and 
Hunt.  But  the  finding  of  the  celebrated  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri  naturally  threw  into 
comparative  obscurity  other  interesting  antikas  which  were  unearthed  at  the  time  ; 
so  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that  Mr.  Grenfell's  report  to  the  Exploration  Fund 
is  to  a  great  extent  occupied  with  literary  matters. 


A   Third  Century  Statuette  in  the   Victoria  and  Albert  Museum.         155 

The  statuette  most  probably  came  from  the  before-mentioned  Graeco-Roman 
cemetery,  west  of  the  town,  of  the  tombs  of  which  Grenfell  tells  us  many  had  been 
anciently  plundered,  and  the  most  of  the  remainder  were  not  earlier  than  the 
third  century.  One  of  several  linen  dolls,  stuffed  with  papyrus,  found  at  the  same 
time,  is  to  be  «een  in  the  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum,  and  is,  I  am  assured, 
correctly  dated  in  the  third  century. 

I  should  like  to  point  out,  too,  though  not  necessarily  as  an  argument,  a 
curious  resemblance  between  the  head  of  our  statuette  and  a  head  of  white  marble 
in  the  Musee  Aloui,  found  at  Zaghouan.  The  coiffure  is  similar  in  each  and  the 
austere  features  are  not  unlike.     It,  too,  is  of  the  third  century. 

All  things  then  considered,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  assigned  date  is 
approximately  correct. 

The  question  now  arises  whether  the  acceptance  of  this  date 
excludes  the  theor>'  that  it  is  a  Madonna  and  Child.  There  is 
no  indication  whatever  that  it  need  be  regarded  as  a  product  of 
Christian  art.  In  fact,  such  evidence  as  may  be  deduced  would 
seem  to  point  to  the  contrary.  Prof  Lethaby,  in  his  article,  refers 
to  the  Hellenic  feeling  about  the  figure  of  the  mother.  This  of 
itself  does  not  of  course  militate  against  its  being  a  Madonna,  but 
the  fact  suggests  at  least  a  pagan  influence  ;  and  the  third  century 
date  of  course  excludes  any  Byzantine  affinity  as  suggested  by 
the  Professor.  On  the  other  hand,  Egypto-Roman  statuettes  of 
Isis  and  Horus  exist  which  are  decidedly  Hellenic  in  feeling,  although 
the  cult  of  Isis  never  underwent  Hellcnisation  in  idea,  as  did  most  of 
the  Egyptian  deities.  Again,  Grenfell,  in  his  report  to  the 
Exploration  Fund,  does  not  mention  a  single  Christian  relic  as 
being  turned  up  from  the  Graeco-Roman  cemetery.  On  the 
contrary,  he  particularises  short  limestone  figures  carved  in  relief — 
two  Gryphons  and  a  Criosphinx — all  distinctly  pagan  objects.  If 
still  further  proof  be  needed  it  may  be  recalled  that  St.  Augustine, 
who  died  A.D.  604,  expressly  states  that  the  introduction  of  such 
visible  objects  as  images  into  the  churches,  was  in  his  day  regarded 
as  unlawful.  Even  pictures  (other  than  symbolical  representations) 
were  not  allowed  in  churches  until  well  into  the  fourth  century. 
The  XXXVIIIth  Canon  of  the  Council  of  Elvira  (A.D.  342)  strictly 
forbade  them.  And  although  as  time  went  on  both  pictures  and 
images  were  tolerated,  it  was  not  until  after  the  Ilnd  Council  of 
Nicaea  (a.d.  787)  that  the  Fathers  encouraged  their  use.  The  theory  of  a  Madonna 
and  Child  of  the  third  century,  therefore,  is  not  to  be  entertained. 

If  not  a  Madonna,  equally  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  doll.  If  this  idea  had 
not  been  reiterated  I  should  not  have  entertained  it  seriously.  But  having  been 
put  forth  in  all  seriousness,  the  hypothesis  must  be  examined.  True  there  is 
a  decided  resemblance  between  the  statuette  and  the  "  Holzpuppe  "  from  Achmin 
in  the  Forrer  Collection,  and  if  the  latter  were  proved  to  be  a  doll  it  might  form  an 
argument.  But  is  the  Forrer  specimen  a  doll?  I  very  much  doubt  it.  In  fact 
the  more  one  studies  these  early  statuettes,  the  more  patent  becomes  the  fact  that 
they  are,  many  of  them,  not  dolls  at  all. 

It  is  a  demonstrable  fact,  that,  from  prehistoric  times  down  to  this  present 
day,  the  little  ones  of  the  world  have  always  had  a  decided  preference  for  dolls 
that  require  to  be  dressed.     That  is  to  say  they  are,  and  have  ever  been,  produced 


156  A   Third  Century  Statuette  in  the   Victoria  and  Albert  Museum. 

for  the  most  part  in  a  state  of  nudity,  which  has  grown  more  delicate  and  less 
obtrusive  in  these  later  days.  There  is  nothing  in  experience  more  tenacious 
than  such  an  instinct,  and  one  may  feel  sure  that  figures  invested  with  drapery  in 
the  modelling  would  not  appeal  to  the  child-mind.  Moreover,  both  our  statuette, 
and  that  figured  by  Forrer,  stand  upon  pedestal-like  blocks  of  wood, — surely  an 
unnecessary  and  inconvenient  appendage  to  a  doll. 

Quite  apart  from  these  considerations  the  fact  that  the  statuette  is  a  Mother 
and  Child  disposes  of  the  doll  theory  in  toto.  Children  are  the  same  the  world 
over  and  at  all  times.  Their  instincts  are  essentially  primitive  and  therefore  the 
more  stable.  Now  a  doll  satisfies  the  incipient  mother-instinct  in  every  little  maid, 
whether  she  live  in  Egypt  or  England — ancient  Oxyrhynchus  or  modern  London. 
Is  it  then  to  be  supposed  that  any  "little  mother"  would  welcome  as  a  doll 
a  figure  which  itself  holds  a  baby  in  its  arms?  I  think  not.  Children  do  not 
play  at  nursing  adult  females  with  babes  in  arms.  The  doll  is  to  them  a  baby,  to 
be  dressed  and  nursed,  undressed  and  put  to  bed. 

This  same  argument  may  be  advanced,  and  quite  as  reasonably,  with  regard 
to  the  terra-cotta  figurines  mentioned  by  the  Professor.  A  similar  objection  may  be 
raised  to  all  so-called  dolls  which  are  clearly  adults, — in  most  cases  plainly  feminine. 

If  not  dolls  what  then,  it  may  be  asked,  are  these  figures  ?  I  think  some  are 
votive  figures,  some  perhaps  amulets  ;  and  the  statuette  we  are  considering  may 
well  be  classed  with  the  former.  I  have  considered  the  possibility  of  its  being 
Isis  and  Horus  ;  this  hypothesis  was  offered  as  an  alternative  to  the  untenable 
Madonna  theory.  Considering  the  matter  further,  however,  there  is  no  denying 
that  there  are  objections  to  the  idea.  The  greatest  perhaps  is  the  absence  of  any 
distinctive  headdress  on  either  figure.  One  would  naturally  expect  to  find  at  least 
some  indication  of  such,  but  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  any  having  ever 
formed  part  of  the  figures.  To  this  consideration  may  be  added  the  unusual 
position  of  the  child  and  its  form.  Also  the  general  lack  of  that  sensuous  feeling 
one  would  expect  to  find  in  a  statue  devoted  to  the  cult  of  Isis.  If,  however,  we 
examine  the  object  in  the  light  of  its  being  a  votive  figure  the  diflficulties 
clear  away. 

The  custom  of  placing  votive  objects  at  the  shrines  of  deities  and  saints  is  of 
extreme  antiquity,  and  at  the  time  when  our  statuette  was  carved  the  usage  was 
very  popular,  not  only  with  the  Egypto-Romans  who  were  pagans,  but  also  among 
the  Christians.  Intent  upon  the  dominant  influence  of  the  period,  we  must  yet 
grasp  the  fact  that  paganism  was  very  far  from  being  abolished  when  it  was 
officially  discountenanced.  In  fact,  some  distinctly  pagan  usages  were  tolerated 
even  in  the  Christian  churches.  The  practice  of  offering  votive  objects  was  one  of 
these,  and  it  even  yet  exists  in  many  places,  though  at  the  Council  of  Lestines 
(A.D.  743)  it  was  condemned  as  pagan.  Theodoret  in  the  fifth  century,  on  the 
other  hand,  speaks  in  words  of  distinct  approval  of  the  practice  prevalent  in  his 
day  of  suspending  votive  offerings  in  the  churches. 

A  votive  object  was  in  effect  a  materialised  prayer  of:  (i)  Petition  (as  of  the 
childless  in  hope  of  offspring) ;  (2)  Oblation  (as  of  parents  offering  their  children 
that  the  Divine  blessing  might  fall  upon  them) ;  or  (3)  Thanksgiving  (on  recovery 
from  illness  or  escape  from  danger). 

The  statuette  in  question  would  possibly  fall  under  the  second  of  these  heads, 
and  I  fail  to  see  any  serious  objection  to  such  a  conclusion. 

The  ascribed  date,  far  from  excluding  the  idea,  makes  it  probable,  and 
whether   it   were   found    in    association    with    Christian   or    pagan    remains,   the 


A   Third  Century  Statuette  iti  the   Victoria  and  Albert  Museum.         157 

probability  is  equally  applicable.  Moreover,  such  a  figure  naturally  would  be 
represented  dressed,  and  the  workmanship  might  be  elaborate  or  distinctly  other- 
wise (as  in  this  case).  It  would  be  quite  in  keeping  that  the  figures  should  be 
formal,  and  that  the  child  should  be  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  (note  the  lower 
extremities  of  th«  child,  how  they  terminate  in  a  point).  The  unusual  position  of 
the  child,  too,  is  understandable  in  the  supposition  that  the  mother  is  offering  her 
child  as  an  oblation  to  the  Higher  Powers.  This  position  of  the  infant,  held  forth 
with  its  back  to  its  mother — its  natural  protector — and  in  such  an  attitude,  seems 
indeed  to  give  a  finality  to  the  argument  that  the  statuette  is  indeed  a  votive  figure. 
Whether  it  be  pagan  or  Christian  it  is  impossible  to  say  definitely ;  in  any  case 
it  is  certainly  pagan  in  conception. 

CvRiL  G.  E.  Bunt. 


158    ) 


ARCHAIC  BURIALS  AT  MARSA  MATrCh. 

In  the  winter  of  1913-1914  I  carried  out,  in  conjunction  with  my  friend 
Mr.  W.  J.  Harding  King,  a  brief  archaeological  survey  in  the  vicinity  of  Marsa 
Matriih.  This  place,  which  represents  the  Graeco-Roman  Paraetonium,  is  situated 
on  a  small  harbour^  on  the  Marmaric  coast,  some  1 50  miles  west  of  Alexandria. 
Because  of  its  geographical  position  with  regard  to  Cyrenaica  and  the  Gebel 
el-'Akabah  in  the  west,  Crete  in  the  north,  the  Oasis  of  Siwah  (Ammonium)  in  the 
south,  and  the  Nile  Delta  in  the  east,  Marsa  MatrQh  had  struck  me,  when  I  first 
visited  it  in  1910,  as  a  very  promising  site  on  which  to  search  for  Libyan  remains. 
This  impression  suggested  by  the  geographical  factors  was  further  supported  by 
topographical  ones.  Not  only  was  the  port  the  one  good  haven  in  the  long  stretch 
from  Tobruk  to  Alexandria,  but  it  had  agricultural  advantages  as  well.  Between 
the  coast  at  MatrClh  and  the  rise  of  the  desert  plateau,  some  six  or  seven  miles  to 
the  south,  is  interposed  a  great  loess  plain.  Although  the  vegetation  in  Marmarica 
depends  almost  wholly  on  the  rainfall,  the  richness  of  the  soil  and  the  size  of  the 
fertile  area  in  the  vicinity  of  Matruh  must  have  attracted  and  sustained  a  population 
at  a  very  early  period.  The  evidence  of  agricultural  activity  in  Roman  times 
(threshing-floors,  vats,  cisterns,  olive-presses,  etc.)  are  numerous ;  and  in  the  late 
third,  or  early  fourth,  century  of  our  era,  Paraetonium  was  very  naturally  the 
centre  at  which  the  government  grain-tithes  were  paid  in.^ 

In  the  reconnaissance  carried  out  by  Mr.  Harding  King  and  myself,  a  great 
number  of  Roman  burials  and  Graeco-Roman  rock-tombs  were  excavated  and 
recorded,  together  with  other  remains  of  a  late  period.  With  these  it  is  not 
necessary  here  to  deal,  since  in  the  present  note  I  wish  only  to  describe  some 
archaic  graves  found  about  two  miles  to  the  east  of  the  Coastguard  Barracks 
at  Matruh. 

The  graves  in  question  were  five  in  number,  and  were  situated  on  a  small 
limestone  spur  which  projected  from  the  northern  face  of  a  long  east  and  west 
ridge  (Fig.  i).  They  were  entered  in  the  records  as  A.  i,  A.  2,  etc.  The  spur  was 
conspicuous  as  having  on  its  summit  a  modern  Arab  burial  encircled — as  is 
common  in  these  parts-' — by  a  wall  of  loose  stones.  The  ancient  graves  were  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  spur,  near  its  highest  part,  about  30  metres  above  sea  level. 
The  place  they  occupied  had  suffered  denudation  from  the  action  both  of  wind  and 
of  rain,  so  that  in  some  places  the  bare  rock  was  exposed.  The  disposition  of  the 
graves  is  shown  in  the  photograph  of  the  site  after  clearing  (F"ig.  2).  The  group 
was  an  isolated  one ;  the  whole  spur,  except  at  one  point  which  was  occupied  by 
the  modern  Arab  tomb,  was  carefully  examined  without  the  discovery  of  any  other 
ancient  interments. 

The  graves  were  roughly  elliptical  in  plan,  the  average  dimensions  being 
about  X  m.  50  cm.  (S  feet)  from  east  to  west,  and  ca.  no  cm.  (3 J  feet)  from  north 
to  south.  The  average  depth  was  only  30-40  cm.  (12-16  inches),  though  originally, 
before  the  denudation  of  the  spur,  they  were  deeper.     But  even  when  they  were 

'  The  harbour  was  anciently  larger  than  at  present,  having  had  a  length  of  40  stadia  in 
Strabo's  time  {Geogr.,  XVII,  p.  798).  Sand-bars  of  recent  formation  have,  despite  coastal 
depression,  cut  off  the  ends  of  the  harbour,  which  is  now  flanked  by  lagoons. 

«  Oxyrrhytuhus  Papyri,  IX,  1221  (p.  265).     Isidore  to  Demetrian. 

'  O.  Bates,  Nomad  Burials  in  Marmarica,  in  Afan,  Vol.  XIII,  No.  10,  Art.  88. 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matrdh. 


159 


made  they  were  dug  a  few  centimetres  into  the  soft  hmestone  underlying  the  stony 
soil,  which  was  therefore  perhaps  not  very  deep.  The  graves  were  marked  in  no 
discernable  way  whatever,  though  in  their  vicinity,  on  the  west  face  of  the  spur, 


♦. 


Fig. 


View  of  Limestone  Spur  containing  Burials. 


Fig.  2.    Positions  of  Graves  opened. 


were  a  few  little  cairns  of  small  stones,  weathered  almost  level  with  the  ground, 
and  containing  nothing.  Such  cairns  are  commonly  found  in  Marmarica  outside 
the  cultivated  areas,  and  are  of  a  nature  as  yet  unknown. 


i6o 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Mairii/i. 


Of  the  five  graves  in  Cemetery  A,  three  (A.  3,  A.  4,  and  A.  5)  were  found  to 
be  completely  cleared  out.  This  I  attribute  to  denudation,  which  exposed  the 
contents  of  the  graves  to  consequent  weathering  or  plundering.     A.  i  and  A.  2 


Fig.  3.     Skeleto.n  a.nd  Objects  in  Grave  1. 


Fig.  5.     Skeleton  and  Objects  in  Grave  2. 

contained   skeletal    remains,   the   original    form   of  the    interment   being   clearly 
discernable,  though  the  bones  were  in  a  hopelessly  fragile  state.     A.  i  contained 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matruh. 


i6i 


the  remains  of  a  body  lying  on  its  left  side,  head  east  (Figs.  3  and  4a,  b).  The 
body  was  in  a  position  of  "  intermediate  "  contraction,  the  right  femur  being  at  an 
angle  of  90°  to  the  spine.  The  left  leg  was  less  acutely  flexed.  The  right  arm 
was  bent  at  the  elbow,  the  forearm  being  practically  parallel  with  the  right  femur. 


/.20 


6B 


8 


Fig.  4,  Grave  i.     Fig.  6,  Grave  2.     Fig.  8,  Basalt  Vase,  Grave  i. 


The  left  arm  was  straight,  the  left  hand  thrust  between  the  knees.  A.  2  was  in 
a  worse  state  of  preservation  than  A.  i.  In  this  second  case  the  body  lay  on  the 
right  side,  head  east  (Figs.  5  and  6a,  b).  The  left  elbow  was  bent,  the  left  hand 
having  been  somewhere  near  the  face.  Of  the  head  nothing  remained  beyond 
a  fragment  of  the  lower  jaw  and  six  teeth. 

L 


l62 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matr&h. 


Figs.  9-11,    Shells  and  Shard, 
Grave  i. 


Contents:  A.  i  (lio  x  76  x-35  cm.)  contained: — 

-p.  A  small  jar  of  basalt,  placed  between  the  chin  and  throat  (for  position. 
Figs.  3  and  4<i ;  Fig.  7;  Fig.  8).  Height,  9-0  cm.  (minimum) ;  diameter  at  widest 
part,  8'3  cm.  The  boring  had  been  done  with  a  winged  drill,  which  scored  the 
interior  of  the  walls  horizontally  (Fig  8.)  The  bore  expanded  so  as  to  follow 
approximately  the  outer  walls  of  the  vessel.  Bottom,  1*3  cm.  thick.  Lip,  thin 
(o'38  cm.  at  spring),  and  in  no  place  complete.  Short  hair-like  striae  of  polishing 
outside,  and,  in  two  places,  traces  of  pecking. 

'^.  Thin  pearly  shell  (Fig.  9),  found  just  above 
the  right  femur,  lying  hollow  side  up.  The  shell 
proved  to  be  an  Iridina  (Lam.)  of  the  fluviatile 
Uniotiidae — an  important  point,  since  it  is  thus 
almost  unquestionably  of  Nilotic  origin.^ 

— .  A  shell  near  the  left  hand,  in  the  angle 
made  by  the  bent  right  leg.  This  shell  (Fig.  10) 
was  almost  certainly  intrusive,  as  these  helices 
{Helix  nucula)  are  very  plentiful  in  Marmarica,  and 
are  often  found,  even  at  a  depth  of  50  or  75  cm., 
below  the  surface  of  undisturbed  earth. 

~^-  Several  shards  of  pottery,  apparently 
weathered  out  of  the  grave,  and  found  on  the  surface. 
Among  these  fragments,  which  were  all  from  the  same  pot,  was  one  piece  of  tlie 
lip,  showing  a  zone  of  roughly  incised  decoration  (Fig.  Iij.  The  ware  was  of  a 
sandy,  black  fabric,  pebble-smoothed  inside,  with  traces  of  a  greenish-black  slip 
outside.     The  walls  of  the  pot  were  fairly  thick. 

^.  A  vase  of  basalt,  from  the  filling  of  the  grave,  ca.  35  cm.  south  of  the 
left  knee,  5  cm.  deep  (Fig.  12 — the  light  spots  in  the  photograph  represent  small 
deposits  of  lime  which  have  formed  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  vessel).  Same 
technique  as  ~,  but  with  cylindrical  bore  (Fig.  13).  Height,  87  (minimum); 
diameter  across  bottom,  ii'5  cm.  on  minimum  axis,  and  1175  on  maximum  axis. 
Lip,  thin  (0*30  cm.  at  spring),  and  in  no  place  complete. 

'—.  Fragments  of  a  small  jar  from  the  central  filling  of  the  grave.  When 
these  were  pieced  together,  about  half  of  the  original  vase  was  missing,  but  the 
form  was  accurately  determinable  (Figs.  14  and  15).  Soft,  fairly  coarse,  buff  ware  ; 
faint  reddish  tinge  in  two  places,  due  to  irregular  firing ;  irregular  black  core  in 
thicker  parts,  especially  near  bottom,  due  to  same  cause  (see  section  shown  in 
Fig.  15);  some  minute  whitish  specks  in  the  clay.  Inside  of  neck  partly  pebble- 
smoothed,  outside  wholly  so.  Height,  iv6  cm.;  diameter  across  top,  8-2  cm.; 
diameter  at  widest  part,  loi  cm.;  thickness  of  walls  at  rim,  0-5  cm.;  at  point 
below  shoulder,  ca.  0'9  cm. ;  at  bottom,  06  cm. 

14  and  ^.     Two  Iridina  shells,  like  ^~,  found  in  the  filling  of  the  grave, 

just  under  ^. 

A.  2  (146  X  100  X  -35  cm.)  contained : 

^  and  ^.  Two  Iridina  shells,  like  W  ^^,  ^.  The  shells  were  found  in 
front  of  the  chin  (Figs.  5  and  6a). 

'  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  W.  F.  Hume,  of  the  Geological  Section  of  the  Egyptian  Survey 
Department,  for  this  identification,  as  for  that  of  ~-  • 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matrilk. 


163 


^.     Fragments  of  a   small  jar  scattered   through  the  central  filling  of  the 
grave.     When  pieced  together  it  was  nearly  perfect  (Figs.   16  and   17).     Fairly 


~14 


AAA'A'^IA^riir 


18 


Ta 


19 


ji « J* 


I'jrA:^A  AAA 


Grave  1.— Figs.  7,  12,  Basalt  Jars.     Fig.  14,  Pottery  Jar. 

Grave  2.— Figs.  16,  18,  19,  Pottery  Jars.     Fig.  i9<5,  Stone  Palette. 

hard,  uniform  gray -black  ware,  black  inside,  fairly  thin,  part  smoothed  outside  and 
decorated  with  rows  of  faintly  incised,  short,  nearly  vertical  strokes.     When  found, 

L  2 


164 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matriih. 


it  \vas  sooty.  Slightly  irregular  in  form,  e.g.,  the  outside  diameter  was  83  cm.  on 
one  axis  (maximum)  and  80  on  another  (minimum).  Height,  li*5  cm.;  diameter 
at  spring  of  neck,  t6  cm. ;  at  widest  part,  9*2  cm. ;  thickness  of  walls  at  middle  of 
neck,  06  cm. ;  at  a  little  below  widest  part  of  body,  i  cm. ;  at  bottom,  04  cm. ; 
width  of  bottom,  ca.  4-0  cm. 

^.  Small  jar  from  earth  half  way  between  A.  2  and  A.  3  (for  position, 
Fig.  2;  Figs.  i8rt,  19a,  and  20).  Red  ware,  not  hard,  smoothed  outside,  and 
red  painted  ;  inside  of  neck  partly  smoothed.  Conventionalized  ears  as  shown. 
Height,  8'6  cm. ;  outside  diameter  of  mouth,  50  cm. ;  of  widest  part,  76  cm. ; 
of  bottom,  2"8  cm. ;  thickness  of  walls,  ca.  06  cm. 

'      13 


\  1. 


Grave  i.— Fig.  13,  Basalt  Vasb.    Fig.  15,  Pottery  Vase. 
Grave  2. — Figs.  17,  20,  Pottery  Vases.    Fig.  21,  Stone  Palette. 

*•  g.  Small  mortar  or  "  palette  "  from  earth  between  A.  2  and  A.  3.  A  sphe- 
roidal lump  of  purplish  conglomerate  with  greenish-white  inclusions  (Figs.  i?,b,  igl>, 
and  2ia,b).  Slight  depression  in  the  top,  nearly  circular  in  plan,  and  showing 
polish.  Other  parts  show  pecked  surface.  Height,  4-6  cm. ;  diameter,  ca.  56  cm. 
and  5"2  cm. ;  depth  of  depression  in  top,  0"S  cm. 

This  completes  the  inventory  of  these  two  graves  ;  the  objects  are  now  in  the 
Peabody  Museum,  Harvard  University. 


Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  MatrAh.  165 

It  is  hardly  to  be  questioned  that  these  burials  are  of  Libyan  origin  :  the 
objects  associated  with  them  are  neither  Egyptian  nor  Minoan,  and  the  locality  in 
which  they  were  found  lies  well  within  the  Libyan  sphere.  The  absolute  date  of 
the  graves  is  at  present  a  matter  of  conjecture,  but  they  are  certainly  pre-classical, 
and  they  show  no  trace  of  that  Egyptian  influence  which  made  itself  felt  throughout 
this  region  in  New  Empire  times.  The  two  stone  vessels  ^  and  '^A^  are  identical 
in  substance  and  technique,  though  not  in  form,  with  some  of  the  finest  stone  vessels 
of  Old  Empire  Egypt ;  and  the  mortar  or  "  palette  "  ^^  is  of  a  type  which  has 
been  found  in  Nubian  graves  of  the  Archaic  Period,  the  Old  and  Middle  Empires. 
The  pottery  is  all  hand-made  and  not  wheel-thrown.  This  is  a  point  of  some, 
though  of  slight,  significance ;  for  whereas  the  pottery  of  the  modern  Bedawin  of 
the  district  is  made  by  hand,  all  the  wares  of  Graeco- Roman  times — even  the  local 
fabrics — thus  far  found  at  Matrfih  were  wheel-made. 

When  the  known  factors  of  the  case  are  considered, — the  weathering  and  general 
aspect  of  the  graves,  the  resemblance  of  the  technique  of  the  stone  vessels  to  that  of 
the  stone  vases  and  bowls  of  Old  Empire  Egypt,  the  analogy  of  the  mortar  to  the 
similar  ones  found  in  Nubia,  and  finally  the  total  disappearance  by  Graeco-Roman 
times  of  the  culture  to  which  these  graves  belonged, — I  would  tentatively  assign 
these  burials  to  a  period  between  2000  and  1 500  B.C. ;  but  until  the  accumulation 
of  further  evidence,  it  can  be  of  no  value  to  science  to  indulge  too  freely  in  such 
speculations. 

Whatever  the  absolute  chronological  position  of  this  material,  one  point  is 
unquestionable :  these  burials  stand  not  at  the  head  of  a  sequence,  but  in  an  inter- 
mediate or  final  position  in  an  otherwise  unknown  culture-scale.  Much  must  lie 
behind  the  admirable  technique  of  such  stone  vessels  as  those  found  in  Grave  A.  i  ; 
the  bodies,  although  both  so  oriented  as  to  have  the  heads  east,  lay  on  different 
sides  and  in  different  degrees  of  contraction,  thus  .showing  a  careless  departure  from 
a  presumably  rigid  primitive  canon  ;  and,  finally,  the  ears  of  the  small  jar  *;  ^ 
are  purely  ornamental,  being  conventionalized  from  an  earlier  form  in  which  they 
must  have  been  pierced  for  suspension. 

Despite  the  slightness  of  these  traces,  their  importance  will  be  generally 
conceded.  They  hint  at  a  whole  primitive  culture,  hitherto  quite  unknown,  and  as 
rich,  presumably,  as  that  of  Predynastic  Egypt  itself. 


Oric  Bates. 


Peabody  Museum, 
Cambridge,  Mass., 
U.S.A. 


For  years  past,  it  has  been  a  hope  of  archaeologists  that  some  remains  should 
be  found  belonging  to  the  early  Libyan  civilisation.  How  important  that  culture 
was  can  be  seen  in  the  account  of  the  vessels  of  silver  and  bronze,  and  the 
abundance  of  bronze  swords,  which  were  captured  from  the  Libyans  by  the 
Egyptians,  when  they  invaded  Egypt  under  Merneptah.  The  discovery  of  even 
only  two  graves  at  once  begins  to  open  our  eyes  to  other  connections  with  Libya. 

L  3 


1 66  Archaic  Burials  at  Marsa  Matrii/i. 

The  peculiar  form  of  basalt  vase,  widening  to  the  base  (Figs.  12,  13)  is  quite 
un-Egyptian ;  but  it  is  almost  exactly  paralleled  by  a  few  vases  which  I  have 
bought  from  time  to  time  in  Egypt.  These  stood  outside  of  the  Egyptian  types, 
and  had  always  been  a  puzzle ;  on  comparing  the  alabaster  Fig.  22,  serpentine 
Fig.  23,  and  basalt  Figs.  26  and  27,  with  Figs.  12,  13,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
they  are  all  of  one  family.  These  four  examples  found  in  Egypt  must  then  be 
Libyan  importations.  If  there  be  an  Egyptian  origin  for  these  it  might  lie  in  the 
wide-based  vases  of  the  Vlth  dynasty  (see  Abydos,  II,  xxi,  8,  of  Pepy).  Knowing 
how  that  form  had  developed  from  a  plain  cylinder  of  the  1st  dynasty,  and  how  it 
went  on  to  a  trumpet-shaped  vase  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  {Ka/iun,  XIII  ;  Diospolis, 
XXIX,  Y.  372),  there  would  be  nothing  surprising  in  its  widening  out  downward 
instead  of  upward,  and  so  producing  this  Libyan  type  at  about  the  Xllth  dynasty. 
The  vase  27  has  had  the  base  edge  roughly  cut  away  in  a  later  time,  and  was 
originally  like  26. 

Another  vase,  Fig.  25,  is  also  of  basalt,  and  not  Egyptian  in  type,  but  has 
much  affinity  to  the  basalt  vase,  Fig.  7.  The  hatching  lines  upon  it  seem  to 
imitate  basket  work  ;  and  they  connect  with  it  the  basalt  bowl.  Fig.  24.  Such  line 
work  is  akin  to  the  line  decoration  of  the  pottery  in  the  first  prehistoric  age  of 
Egypt,  which  is  Libyan  in  origin.  The  form  of  Fig.  25  is  most  like  the  globular 
vases  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  though  they  have  smaller  necks  (see  Diospolis,  XXIX, 
W.  72,  Y.  152,  W.  32,  W.  72).  A  wider  neck  was  probably  the  earlier  form,  as  in 
D.,  XXVIII,  Y.  8,  W.  100,  though  the  bases  of  these  do  not  agree.  We  may 
gather  then  that  the  amount  of  similarity  to  Egyptian  types  gives  a  suggestion  of 
a  period  between  the  Vlth  and  Xllth  dynasties,  or  perhaps  in  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
for  both  of  these  types. 

These  six  vases  (Figs.  22-27)  which  have  been  bought  in  Egypt  without 
a  history,  and  are  now  in  University  College,  London,  may  then  be  set  down  as 
being  probably  importations  from  some  Libyan  source  into  Egypt.  How  much 
else  may  be  thus  discriminated  by  the  light  of  further  discoveries  in  Libya  we 
cannot  guess.  No  other  vases  of  these  forms  are  shown  in  the  catalogues  of  the 
Cairo  or  Turin  Museums,  but  probably  there  may  be  others  lurking  disregarded  in 
various  collections. 


W.  M.   F.   P. 


(     16/-     ) 


Stone  Vases  Bol'ght  in  Egypt.     Scale  2:3. 
(University  College,  Londo.n.) 
Fig.  22,  Alabaster.  Fig.  23,  Serpentine. 

Figs.  24,  25,  Basalt,  with  Incised  Basket-Pattern. 
Figs.  26,  27,  Basalt  ;  27  cot  round  the  Base  Later. 


L  4 


(     i68     ) 


THE   EGYPTIAN   MUSEUM,   UNIVERSITY   COLLEGE. 

The  starting  point  of  the  Museum,  the  Library,  and  teaching  of  Egyptology  in 
London,  was  the  visit  that  Miss  Amelia  Edwards  paid  to  Egypt  in  1874.  She 
.then  began  to  take  that  interest  in  the  country  which  led  her  to  endow  Egyptology 
by  bequest.  That  endowment  she  would  have  fixed  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  had 
women  there  been  given  the  degrees  which  are  due  to  them  by  examination.  As 
those  Universities  would  not  do  justice,  she  turned  to  London  where  no  disabilities 
rested  on  any  class  of  student.  She  left  her  property  for  a  modest  endowment  of 
teaching  in  Lbndon,  and  she  began  gathering  a  few  antiquities  to  add  to  those 
which  she  had  bought  when  in  Egypt.  From  the  excavations  of  the  Egypt 
Exploration  Fund  various  objects  of  no  great  value  were  granted  to  her  "for  a 
museum."  Thus  it  came  about  that  when,  owing  to  the  complications  of  an 
accident,  she  died  unexpectedly  early  in  1892,  there  were  not  only  her  books  on 
Egypt  as  the  basis  of  a  library,  but  also  a  collection  which  would  fill  three  or  four 
glass  cases,  as  the  nucleus  of  a  teaching  collection.  It  had  been  her  wish  that 
I  should  take  up  the  work  at  University  College ;  and  on  her  death,  and  the 
establishment  of  the  chair  there,  I  accepted  the  position  which  was  offered.  Thus 
there  passed  again  into  my  care  many  of  the  things  which  I  had  found,  as  nearly 
all  her  collection  had  come  from  my  excavations. 

Meanwhile,  another  collection  had  been  growing.  When  I  first  went  to  Egypt 
in  1 88 1,  I  began  nibbling  at  the  flow  of  antiquities  in  dealers'  hands.  A  few 
pounds  the  first  year,  were  followed  by  increasing  amounts  spent  each  year  as 
I  got  experience.  When  excavating  privately,  a  share  of  the  antiquities  that 
I  found  also  came  to  my  own  collection.  It  outgrew  two  rooms,  and  was  stored  in 
boxes,  when  the  unexpected  move  to  University  College  gave  space,  in  part  of  the 
old  engineering  drawing  school,  to  set  out  what  I  had,  as  a  loan  collection.  I  had 
by  that  time  acquired  a  preference  in  the  Egyptian  market  for  some  kinds  01 
antiquities  which  were  saved  for  me  by  different  dealers,  so  that  scarabs,  tools, 
stone  vases,  and  other  classes  of  things  came  readily  to  hand.  I  never  had  the 
advantage  of  continuously  living  in  touch  with  the  Cairo  dealers,  or  having  time  to 
go  ferreting  out  important  matters  in  the  country.  These  advantages  which  many 
residents  had,  were  to  some  degree  compensated  by  the  visits  which  some  of  the 
country  dealers  used  to  pay  me  on  their  way  to  Cairo,  where  I  saw  the  best  of 
their  stocks  on  the  road.  Good  things  have  turned  up  in  the  most  une.xpected 
manner.  An  old  dealer  from  Mellawi  brought  a  handful  of  scarabs  one  day ; 
among  them  lay  the  heart  scarab  of  Akhenaten,  which  he  only  regarded  as  being 
big  and  having  a  silver  plate.  A  Gizeh  dealer  appeared  at  my  wall  one  day,  and 
handed  over  to  me  the  cylinder  seal  of  Khufu's  Pyramid,  but  he  well  knew  the 
value  of  it.  Another  day  the  gold  ring  of  the  prefect  of  Egypt  under  Antoninus 
was  dropped  into  my  hands  in  the  same  way.  I  called  in  Cairo  on  a  friend  who 
had  just  come  down  the  night  before,  and  seen  the  opening  of  the  passage  of  the 
tomb  of  Amenhotep  I  at  Thebes.  The  next  person  I  met  was  a  very  meek  little^ 
dealer  from  Thebes,  who  had  also  come  down  the  night  before,  and  who  put  in  my 
hand  the  gold  ring  of  Amenhotep  I.  One  evening  when  I  was  in  Cairo,  the  dealers 
who  besieged  the  hotel  after  dinner  came  in,  and  one  rolled  out  of  a  bag  the  head  of 
Nar-mer,  the  finest  piece  of  1st  dynasty  sculpture  that  is  known.  I  bought  in 
Cairo  an  alabaster  figure  of  archaic  Greek  work,  and  then  asked  where  it  came 


The  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College.  169 

from.  I  got  the  name  Nebireh,  and  went  to  search  for  it  in  the  Delta.  There 
I  found  Naukratis,  the  greatest  settlement  of  the  early  Greeks  in  Egypt.  Such 
are  some  of  the  most  agitating  moments  of  an  archaeologist's  life,  when  a  splendid 
prize  comes  most  unexpectedly  into  one's  hands,  as  if  it  were  an  every-day  matter. 
There  was  no  pubfic  pocket  behind  my  endeavours,  to  ensure  that  I  could  secure 
whatever  was  worth  having.  But  I  never  bargained,  or  advanced  my  ofTers.  One 
single  bid  was  made ;  and  it  was  so  well  known  that  such  was  my  limit,  that  unless 
a  dealer  felt  certain  of  getting  more  elsewhere  he  generally  accepted  the  valuation. 
The  better  a  man  knew  me  the  more  certain  we  were  of  doing  business. 

Thus  gradually  there  was  accumulated  a  hoard  which  lay  in  layers  piled  on 
sheets  of  paper  one  over  the  other  in  the  few  cases  at  the  College.  Stores  of 
larger  objects  had  to  lie  out  in  ever  increasing  soot  and  dirt  about  the  room,  far 
too  many  and  too  tender  to  let  cleaners  work  at  them.  Stones  became  hopelessly 
grey,  pottery  was  smashed  by  brooms  and  scrubbing,  and  the  accumulation 
seemed  getting  beyond  my  control.  The  moving  of  the  Yates  Library  gave  some 
space  ;  and  then  the  College  agreed  to  take  over  the  whole  collection  within 
five  years.  The  ordering  of  the  requisite  cases  was  the  next  matter,  spun  out  over 
three  years  owing  to  the  smallness  of  the  annual  grant.  After  they  were  made  by 
one  of  the  best-known  makers,  and  the  objects  partly  arranged,  they  proved  to  be 
of  such  badly  seasoned  wood  that  they  had  to  be  sent  away  again  to  stop  the 
cracks,  making  much  more  delay.  Then  a  first-class  maker  was  tried,  who  did 
excellent  work,  but  who  used  material  which  warped  so  that  all  his  cases  had  to 
be  sent  away  after  six  months  and  remade.  Little  by  little  the  changes  were 
pushed  through.  The  library  was  moved  to  a  different  part  of  the  room ;  the  piles 
of  dusty  stores  were  all  cleaned,  worked  over,  and  arranged  ;  the  cases  were  put  in 
order,  labelled,  and  numbered  throughout  in  sections  from  i  to  999.  Thus  at  last 
the  whole  appeared  in  public  condition  at  the  E.xhibition  held  during  June,  1915. 
The  cost  of  the  collection,  which  the  College  agreed  to  recoup,  was  mainly  met  by 
the  generosity  of  Mr.  Walter  Morrison,  and  also  largely  by  Mr.  Robert  Mond.  For 
the  first  time,  a  teaching  collection  of  Egyptology  has  been  put  in  shape,  arranged 
to  show  the  historical  development  of  the  principal  products,  with  almost  all 
the  objects  dated.  There  is  no  other  dated  series  of  pottery,  beads,  scarabs, 
tools,  ushabtis,  or  stone  vases,  which  is  of  anything  like  the  same  extent.  The  means 
of  systematic  study  of  Egyptology  were  at  last  provided,  and  on  a  scale  which  the 
original  foundress  could  never  have  anticipated. 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  collection  to  those  who  are  not  able  to  use  it,  some 
general  views  are  here  shown,  and  the  various  sections  are  outlined.  The  room 
containing  it  occupies  the  top  floor  of  one  wing  of  University  College,  120  feet  long 
and  50  feet  wide.  About  a  fifth  of  this  sJDace  is  occupied  by  the  Egyptian  library, 
workroom  and  stores,  and  spaces  too  dark  for  exhibition.  The  remainder  is  filled 
with  glass  cases  as  closely  as  may  be.  The  lighting  varies  in  different  parts, 
skylight,  clerestory  and  side  window,  but  is  better  than  in  most  museums ; 
accompanied'  by  excessive  heat  and  cold  according  to  the  season,  owing  to  being 
mostly  under  a  low  glass  roof.  The  cases  were  planned  to  suit  the  light  in  each 
position,  so  as  to  gain  complete  lighting,  without  reflections  of  skylights  being  so 
terribly  in  the  way  as  they  are  in  many  museums.  For  this,  the  table  cases  under 
the  skylights  are  sloped  at  45  degrees,  and  thus  the  reflections  of  sky  from  them 
give  a  front  light  on.  the  upright  cases  alternating  with  them.  Lower  slopes  and 
flat  cases  come  under  the  solid  roof.  A  sort  of  glass  gallery,  90  feet  long  and 
5  feet  wide,  serves  to  hold  the  series  of  pottery.     Shallow  cases  hung  along  the 


I/O 


Tfu  Egyptian  Museum,   University  College. 


room  hold  the  hundreds  of  bead  necklaces,  with  light  falling  through  them.  Lastly, 
sculptured  blocks  are  each  boxed  with  glass  front,  and  glass  top  slip  to  light  them, 
so  that  they  can  be  stacked  in  walls,  self-supporting.  As  the  cases  are  thus 
adapted  to  the  conditions,  so  the  arrangement  of  objects  is  ruled  by  the  best 
position  for  each.  Sculptures,  scarabs  and  figures,  which  are  in  relief,  with  an 
oblique  lighting  ;  coloured  objects  with  a  diffuse  light.  The  further  details  would 
only  interest  a  curator,  who  has  to  face  similar  needs. 

The  series  of  pottery  runs  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  room,  containing 
more  than  a  furlong  length  of  shelving  (see  along  the  right  edge  of  View  i).  Yet 
even  this  amount  of  space  is  much  crowded,  and  a  far  larger  provision  would  be 
needed  for  anything  like  a  complete  series.     This  deals  only  with  the  historic  ages  ; 


View- 


Cases  OF  Beads  and  Long  Case  of  Pottery. 


and  the  prehistoric  pottery  crowds  on  all  sides  another  case  15  feet  long  (see 
View  2).  All  the  varieties  of  this  pottery,  in  forms  and  quality,  need  to  be 
known  by  heart  when  e.xcavating,  as  usually  the  shards  found  are  the  main  clue  to 
the  dating  of  the  ground.  Thirty-five  years  ago,  when  I  began  to  dig,  pottery  was 
almost  unknown  and  disregarded,  unless  it  was  painted  or  of  graceful  forms  ;  in 
the  pre*scientific  days  it  is  said  that  Burgon  let  smash  many  a  big  vase  until  he 
found  that  they  were  painted  Panathenaic  vases,  which  only  needed  washing  to  be 
revealed  and  thought  invaluable.  The  present  generation  has  awoke  to  the 
elementary  necessity  of  knowing  pottery  well,  if  we  are  to  understand  what  we  are 
about,  in  digging.  After  sectioning  the  stratified  city  mound  of  Lachish,  and 
collecting  all  the  varieties  of  pottery,  it  was  possible  to  walk — or  even  ride — over 
town  sites  in  Palestine,  and  date  them  at  once  without  even  picking  up  the  shards. 


The  Egyptian  Museum,   University  College. 


171 


Before  that,  no  one  could  date  a  whole  vase,  let  alone  a  fragment.  This  long  series 
of  over  a  thousand  pots,  from  tall  amphorae  down  to  tiny  saucers,  is,  then,  the  first 
study  for  an  excavator,  the  very  alphabet  of  his  work. 

The  knowledge  of  beads  is  almost  as  important  as  that  of  pottery,  and  in 
European  archaeWogy  it  is  perhaps  the  most  important,  as  beads  are  carried  by 
trade  over  all  countries,  and  hence  serve  to  connect  together  the  periods  of  culture 
in  different  lands.  There  are  about  seven  hundred  strings  of  beads  here,  nearly  all 
dated,  beside  one  or  two  hundred  more  kept  in  drawers.  The  cases  are  seen  in 
View  I,  hanging  down  the  length  of  the  room.  The  strings  are  in  some  instances 
on  the  original  threads,  others   have   been   transferred   in   exact  order  on  to  new 


View  2.    Case  of  Prehistoric  Pottery. 


thread ;  such  sets  show  what  were  the  designs  of  the  threading,  and  how  colours 
were  arranged.  In  most  graves  the  beads  are  found  loose,  and  we  only  know  that 
they  belong  together ;  then  the  patterns  of  the  original  threading  serve  to  show 
how  they  should  be  restored.  In  getting  strings  of  beads  from  dealers  it  is  pretty 
plain  generally  how  far  they  are  clean  lots  found  together,  or  if  they  have  been 
mixed  with  beads  of  other  periods.  Often  a  string  will  be  of  all  periods,  only  fit 
for  the  tourist,  and  worthless  for  a  collection. 

At  the  end  of  View  i  is  one  of  the  cases  of  slate  palettes  in  animal  form.  These 
are  of  a  great  variety,  in  eight  wall  cases  here.  They  belong  to  all  parts  of  the  pre- 
dyna.stic  civilisation,  but  come  to  an  abrupt  end  at  the  beginning  of  the  1st  dynasty, 
when  they  were  last  used  by  the  poorer  class,  and  not  by  the  invading  rulers. 


172  The  Egyptian  Museum,   University  College. 

The  cases  of  palaeolithic  flints  in  View  3  are  the  material  from  which  the 
illustrations  were  taken  for  the  articles  on  the  Stone  Age  in  Egypt,  in  the  last  two 
numbers  of  ANCIENT  Egypt.  They  all  belong  to  ages  before  the  continuous 
civilisation  which  we  find  in  the  predynastic  times.  The  series  of  the  predynastic 
flints  is  much  larger  than  the  palaeolithic,  but  being  of  lesser  size  they  will  not 
show  clearly  in  a  general  view. 

The  early  dynastic  vases  and  small  objects,  in  View  4,  date  from  the  close  of 
Dynasty  o  to  the  close  of  Dynasty  II.     The  head  on  the  upper  shelf  is  a  sculptor's 


View  4.     Cases  of  Vases  of  1st  and  IInd  Dynasty. 

study,  which  so  closely  resembles  the  profile  of  Nar-mer  on  his  slate  palette  that 
it  is  almost  certainly  that  king  himself. 

The  pyramid  period  is  represented  by  the  cases  of  stone  vases  ;  they  are  nearly 
all  of  hard  rocks,  as  granite,  diorite,  quartz  or  metamorphic.  Further  on  is  the 
alabaster,  which  became  more  usual  in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties,  and  almost 
the  only  material  in  the  Xth-XIVth  dynasties.  In  the  XVIIIth  dyna.sty  to  Roman 
times,  only  soft  alabaster  and  .steatite  were  worked,  and  mostly  in  small  sizes,  as 
seen  in  the  next  case.     (View  5.)     Metal  vases  of  all  periods  are  in  a  further  case. 

The  scarabs  and  small  objects  with  royal  and  personal  names  number  over 
2CXX),  and  there  are  about  1200  with  designs  upon  them.     These  are  too  small  to 


The  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College. 


U2 


View  3.    Palaeolithic  Flints. 


View  5.     Cases  of  Metal  and  Alabaster  Vases. 


1/4 


Tlte  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College. 


be  shown  in  a  general  view,  but  are  the  more  important  part  of  the  collection,  as 
illustrating  the  variety  of  style  and  work  throughout  Egyptian  history.  Two 
hundred  and  seventy  royal  personages  are  represented  and  three  hundred  private 
persons,  forming  the  most  continuous  series  that  there  is.  This  is  about  equal  to 
all  the  national  collections  of  foreign  countries  put  together.  The  designs  have 
also  much  interest.  The  geometrical  patterns  are  often  most  exquisitely  outlined 
and  cut.  The  figures  of  the  gods  include  the  rare  foreign  deities  Sutekh,  Astarte, 
Qedesh,  and  the  Vedic  wind-god  Vatu,  which  is  another  link  of  the  Aryan  deities 
with  the  Mediterranean  world.  The  case  of  button  seals  will  some  day  be  the  key 
to  one  of  the  darkest  ages  of  Egypt,  the  fall  of  the  Old  Kingdom.     These  seals 


View  6.    Figures  of  the  Middle  and  Old  Kingdoms. 


were  all  made  by  foreigners,  and  the  connections  of  them,  so  far,  lie  with 
Mesopotamia.  Another  case  contains  about  half  of  the  early  cylinders  that  are 
known,  and  casts  of  most  of  the  rest.  This  series  shows  the  earliest  group  of 
inscriptions,  older  than  any  of  the  other  monuments. 

The  figures  of  gods  and  persons  are  arranged  according  to  period.  Here  the 
figures  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  and  earlier  times  are  shown  in  View  6  ;  six  other 
cases  contain  those  from  the  XVII Ith  dynasty  to  Roman  times.  The  classification 
by  age  greatly  helps  in  grasping  the  character  of  each  stage  of  art ;  it  is  ascertained 
from  the  names  on  the  personal  figures,  the  dedicators'  names  on  the  figures  of 
gods,  the  localities,  and  the  characteristics  of  work,  so  that  very  few  pieces  have 
any  uncertainty  as  to  their  historical  position. 


The  Egyptian  Museum,    University  College. 


175 


The  larger  heads  of  various  periods  are  placed  in  one  line  for  comparison 
(View  7).  The  earliest,  beginning  at  the  right,  is  one  of  the  heads  made  separately 
for  burial  in  the  tombs  of  the  IVth  dynasty.  Next  is  a  head  of  Amenemhat  III  of 
the  XII th  dynasty,  which  was  published  in  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1914,  p.  48.  Then 
a  beautiful  pair  of^usts  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  ;  this  and  the  previous  head  were 
of  the  Edwards'  Collection.  Other  heads  of  later  times  follow.  The  second  case 
contains  the  plaster  modelled  heads  of  Graeco-Roman  age,  which  are  of  far  better 
work  than  the  stone  sculpture  of  the  same  time. 

On  the  small  shelves  below  are  the  lesser  figures,  which  are  seen  better  thus 
than  in  an  upright  case.  The  group  at  the  right  is  a  curious  class  of  glazed 
figures,  made  under  foreign  influences,  probably  about  800  B.C.  In  some  of  them 
Assyrian  design  is  obviou.s.  Beyond  are  bronze  figures.  In  the  further  case 
(unopened)  are  the  seals  and  engraved  stones. 


View  7.     Heads  from  Ro.\ian  to  Early  Period. 

The  long  series  of  heads  of  foreigners,  modelled  in  terra-cotta,  which  were 
found  at  Memphis,  are  all  here.  A  part  of  them  are  seen  at  the  top  of  View  8. 
The  original  purpose  of  them  is  quite  unknown,  as  no  bodies  according  with  such 
heads  have  been  found,  yet  they  are  all  broken  off  from  some  support.  The  age 
of  them  is  indicated  by  the  prominence  of  the  Persian  army, — king,  officer,  and 
Scythian  cavalry,  while  only  one  of  the  latest  appears  to  be  a  Macedonian. 
Probably  they  range  through  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  B.C.  Whenever 
a  collective  study  of  the  racial  types  of  the  ancient  world  shall  be  made,  it  will  be 
possible  to  identify  the  majority  of  these  heads,  which  remain  still  unplaced. 

In  the  case  below  are  the  stamps  of  various  periods.  The  larg  st  is  Arabic, 
most  of  them  are  Roman,  but  small  stamps  go  back  to  1 000  or  1500  B.C.  They 
were  used  for  marking  property ;  the  larger  for  piles  of  flour  or  grain  to  prevent 
pilfering,  or  for  sealing  mud  seals  placed  over  the  wooden  locks  of  doors,  as  is 
now  done.  The  smaller  were  used  for  scaling  wine  jars  and  lesser  objects.  Beyond 
them  is  a  part  of  the  case  of  figures  of  the  XXVIth  dynasty. 


1/6 


Tlie  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College, 


The  long  series  of  amulets  we  need  not  notice  here,  as  they  have  been  all 
published  in  photograph.  There  are  over  two  thousand  amulets,  comprising 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  two  hundred  and  seventy  different  kinds  that  are  known  ; 
this  is  by  far  the  most  complete  series  that  has  been  collected. 

The  ushabti  figures  are  the  most  familiar  of  all  Egyptian  products,  being 
brought  over  by  the  thousand  ever}'  year  in  the  hands  of  tourists.  The  series 
here  has  been  weeded  of  duplicates  and  arranged  to  show  the  varieties  of  style  in 
each  period.  In  View  9  the  earliest  are  on  the  left  hand  at  the  top.  A  few 
figures  are  known,  of  mummy  form,  dating  from  the  Xllth  dynasty;  but  none 
of  them    have  the  Chapter  of    the    Book   of  the    Dead   with    reference   to   the 


View  8.     Heads  of  Foreigners.     Engraved  Stamps. 


ushabti,  or  agricultural  serf,  who  was  to  do  the  farming  in  the  Other  World. 
Such  figures  represent  the  deceased  person,  and  sometimes  have  an  inscription 
of  nesut  da  hetep  for  him.  The  earliest  of  the  wooden  figures  of  the  New 
Kingdom,  the  very  rude  ones  of  the  XVI  Ith  dynasty,  also  have  such  an 
inscription.  It  is  not  till  the  XVI I  Ith  dynasty  that  the  serf-figures  became  the 
usual  accompaniment  of  a  burial.  The  finest  here  is  the  largest  one  for  Nehi, 
viceroy  of  the  Sudan  under  Tehutmes  III,  which  is  beautifully  engraved.  From 
that  point  the  ushabti  declines  until  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty,  when  it  was  degraded 
to  a  little  bit  of  mud  with  traces  of  a  head.  In  the  XXVth  dynasty  it  was 
revived  in  different  style,  and  thence  degraded  down  to  the  XXXth,  when  it 
disappeared  entirely.     It  is  remarkable  how  very  different  qualities  of  ushabtis  are 


The  Egyptian  Museum,   University  College. 


177 


View  9.     Ushabtis  of  XVIIIth-XXIst  Dynasties. 


View  ic.     Measures  of  Capacity,  and  Weigims. 

placed  together   in    tombs.     Thi.s  suggests    that   they    were    the  separate  gifts  of 
various  members  of  the  household,  one  fine  one  being  from  the  eldest  son,  half 

M 


178 


The  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College. 


a  dozen  common  ones  from  the  family,  and  perhaps  one  or  two  dozen  very  rough 
ones  from  the  labourers.  This  will  explain  how,  even  in  a  royal  burial  such  as 
that  of  Sety  I,  there  were  ushabtis  of  every  kind  and  degree  of  work.  They  were 
the  substitute  for  the  much  earlier  sacrifice  of  the  royal  household  at  the  funeral. 

Three  cases  contain  the  series  of  glass  weights.  Stamped  glass  had  been 
used  for  amulets  in  the  second  century,  and  later  for  tokens  and  weights.  Soon 
after  the  Arab  conquest  of  Egypt  this  system  became  very  general,  and  glass 
weights  show  stamps  of  makers  and  rulers  over  some  five  centuries. 

The  Egyptian  weights  and  measures  occupy  several  cases,  there  being  here 
by  far  the  greater  part  of  all  the  known  weights,  of  all  sizes  from  seven  grains  up 
to  two  hundred-weight.  The  cubits  and  measures  of  length  are  rarely  met  with, 
and  the  series  of  measures  of  capacity  has  never  been  collected  before.  They  are 
seen  in  View  lo  arranged  with  the  Syrian  standard  on  the  upper  shelf,  the 
Egyptian  hennu  on  the  second,  and  the  Hebrew  log  below  that.  The  rows  of 
weights  are  seen  in  the  case  beyond. 


View  ii.     Cases  of  Technical  Specimens. 

The  general  View  1 1  will  show  the  extent  of  this  more  technical  side  of  the 
collection.  Near  by  are  the  Coptic  cases,  and  the  stone  sculptures  in  glazed  bo.xes 
stacked  together.  Beyond  are  the  weights,  moulds,  tools,  minerals,  toys,  etc.  The 
sculptures  are  seen  in  View  12  ;  those  of  the  XVIIIth-XXth  dj-nasty  at  the  back, 
and  nearer  at  the  right  those  of  the  Old  Kingdom.  Each  stone  is  boxed,  with  not 
only  a  glass  front  for  seeing  it,  but  also  a  slip  of  glass  along  the  top  to  give  direct 
edge-lighting  on  the  relief.  In  ordinary  glazing,  when  all  the  oblique  lighting  has 
to  pass  through  the  front,  nearly  all  the  light  is  reflected  awa)',  and  in  any  case  the 
edges  are  dark.  By  a  separate  edge-lighting  the  whole  face  is  well  shown.  Such 
a  series  of  examples  of  sculpture  of  all  periods,  from  1st  dynasty  to  Coptic,  is 
required  to  train  the  eye  in  varieties  and  details  of  style.  For  this  purpose  they 
should  all  be  put  close  together,  so  that  a  large  mass  of  one  period  of  relief  can  be 
seen  at  once,  and  a  general  impression  of  style  produced  on  the  mind,  in  a  way  which 
scattered  examples  cannot  do.  Other  sculpture,  which  is  not  flat  for  boxing  in  this 
way,  is  put  in  small  cases  along  the  side  of  the  gangway  up  this  part  of  the  room. 


The  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College. 


179 


The  great  profusion  of  the  glazed  trinkets,  pendants,  and  inlays  for  wall 
decoration,  were  made  in  pottery  moulds,  of  which  there  are  many  hundreds  of 
varieties,  placed  here  along  with  the  objects  which  were  made  from  them.  This 
manufacture  arose  at  Tell  Amarna  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  was  thence 
continued  on  a  lOser  scale  down  to  Greek  times.  The  art  of  Tell  Amarna  is 
further  shown  by  the  stone  sculpture,  and  inlayed  hieroglyphs  cut  in  stone ;  also 
the  great  variety  of  coloured  glazes  for  beads  and  pendants,  inlay  in  stone  walls, 
and  dishes  for  table  service.  Other  cases  contain  a  series  of  glazed  objects  from 
the  1st  dynasty  to  Roman  times,  in  historical  order.  These  serve  to  teach  the 
varieties  of  colour  and  treatment  of  glaze  throughout  their  history.     Other  cases 


View  12.     Sculptured  Sto.nes  in  Glazed  Boxes. 


contain  the  series  of  the  manufacture  of  glass,  showing  each  stage  from  raw 
material  and  crucibles  to  finished  vases,  as  made  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  There 
is  also  a  quantity  of  glass  mosaic  and  other  glass-work  of  the  Roman  age. 

Beyond  this  are  cases  with  examples  of  mummification,  pieces  of  coffins, 
cartonnage,  and  the  various  funeral  offerings,  linen  inscribed  with  scenes  from  the 
Book  of  the  Dead,  wooden  labels  for  mummies,  pottery  houses  for  the  soul,  and 
other  funeral  furniture. 

The  next  cases  contain  examples  of  spinning  and  weaving  of  all  periods, 
spindles  and  whorls  and  pieces  of  looms.  Beyond  are  mirrors,  some  with  figure 
handles,  others  of  lotus  leaf  form,  and  one  engraved.  The  later  mirrors  of  Roman 
time  were  of  glass  coated  with  thin  pewter  on  the  back,  like  a  silvered  looking- 
glass  ;  all  such  are  of  thin  blown  glass,  convex,  and  diminishing,  like  mirrors  in 

M  2 


i8o 


The  Egyptian  Museum,  University  College. 


fashion  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Adjoining  are  the  varieties  of  kohl  pots,  spoons, 
tweezers,  hair-pins,  and  hair  curlers.  In  the  next  cases  are  metal  necklets,  bracelets 
and  earrings,  and  a  series  of  headrests  from  the  Ilird  to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  in 
historical  order.     Other  cases  contain  the  minerals  and  the  shells  found  in  Egypt. 

The  tools  are  an  important  section  for  their  variety,  and  for  their  being  dated 
in  many  instances  by  inscriptions,  or  by  groups  in  which  they  were  found.  Thus 
a  continuous  development  can  be  traced  in  the  forms  of  the  axes,  adzes  chisels, 
knives,  etc.  The  cases  of  wooden  tools  are  shown  in  View  13,  containing  brushes, 
locks,  mallets,  winnowing  fans,  hoes,  throw  sticks,  and  many  other  forms. 

At  the  end  of  the  room  are  cases  of  stone  and  plaster  work,  and  architectural 
pieces  ;  these  show  the  methods  of  cutting  stone,  the  large  use  of  plaster  for  casting 
models  for  students,  and  the  trial  pieces  of  students'  carving. 


^^^^^^  S' 

1 

PI 

4' 

i.. 

^^^^^^^^^^^^Hi^r^B^H^^I^^^^^^V 

1 

.  ^>^**5m^jr^^H 

View  13.     Cases  of  Wooden  Tools. 

Beside  the  exhibited  material  there  is  the  collection  of  papyri  of  the  Xllth 
dynasty  from  Kahun,  a  large  series  of  limestone  ostraka  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  and 
a  great  quantity  of  pottery  ostraka  with  demotic,  Greek,  and  Coptic  documents. 

When  I  first  went  to  Egypt,  thirty-five  years  ago,  nothing  was  known  of  the 
technical  or  industrial  history  of  the  country.  Whether  beads  were  made  in  early 
times  as  well  as  late,  what  were  the  modes  and  dates  of  glass  working,  when 
various  forms  of  tools  were  used,  what  was  the  method  of  stone  working, — all  was 
a  blank.  So  little  was  known  of  pottery  that  Dr.  Birch  asked  me  to  pack  a  box  of 
fragments  from  each  great  site  I  visited,  because  from  the  known  history  of  the 
great  cities  it  might  be  possible  to  guess  the  age,  and  so  get  a  clue  to  dating  the 
pottery.  Now  every  form,  historic  and  prehistoric,  is  pretty  closely  dated,  and  we 
know  far  more  of  the  history  of  Egyptian  products  than  we  do  of  those  of  Greece 
or  Italy. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


(     i8[     ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Recneil  de  Travaiix  relatifs  a  la  Philologie  et  a  l Archdologie 
egyptiennes  et  assyrieniies,  Vol.  XXXVI,   19 14.     Liv.  3-4. 

RUSCH,  Richard. — Hethitiscfie  Zahlzeidun.  This  is  a  disheartening  style  of 
paper,-  giving  many  resemblances  of  notation  of  numbers,  without  discrimination  of 
what  is  probable,  and  without  any  historical  grounds  of  connection.  It  seems  very 
unlikely  that  the  Greek  use  of  A  for  ten  can  have  arisen  from  the  circle  so  used  in 
Babylon,  the  obvious  origin  is  the  word  Atxa,  just  as  n  is  used  for  five  derived  from 
riti'Tf.  It  is  also  too  much  to  claim  the  Latin  use  of  (t)  for  i,ooo,  from  the  circle 
with  a  bar  through  it,  when  the  obvious  source  is  the  initial  of  viille.  Again  X 
being  ten  in  Roman  notation,  the  use  of  half  of  it,  V,  for  five  is  obvious,  without 
trying  to  connect  it  with  two  sides  of  a  square  sign  for  ten  in  Babylonia.  Such 
resemblances  show  that  a  strict  requirement  of  descent  is  really  necessary  before 
we  can  come  to  any  safe  conclusions  about  the  history  of  notation. 

MasperO,  G. — Les  Monuments  Egyptiens  du  Muse'e  de  Marseille.  This  paper 
gives  long  detailed  descriptions  (without  any  illustration)  of  the  coffins  of 
Khensumes,  Thentamen,  Nubemusekht,  Onkh-khensu,  and  Samertui.  Though 
required  in  any  comparative  study  of  the  details  of  coffins,  it  does  not  seem  that 
the  inscriptions  contain  any  unusual  features. 

Legrain,  G. — Recherches  sur  la  famille  dont fit partie  Montouenihat.     11"=  partie. 
Les  enfants  de  Khaeinhor,  Chap.  IV'=,  Branche  Petanion.     This  is  a  continuation  of 
the  paper  already  summarised  in  this  Journal,  pp.  24-26.     It  should  be  said  as  a 
warning  that,  in  these  papers,  the  genealogical  tables  are   all  reversed  from    the 
ordinary  usage,  and  have  the  latest  generation  at  the  top.     This  paper  deals  with 
the  family  of  Tabathat,  who  married  Besenmut.     The  documents  quoted  are  : — 
LXVII.     Coffin  of  Tabathat. 
LXVI II.     Bottom  of  coffin  of  Tabathat. 
LXIX.     Wooden  stele  of  Tabathat. 
LXX.     Wooden  board  of  Tabathat. 
LXXI.     Ushabti  box  of  Babau,  mother  of  Tabathat. 
LXXII.     Coffin  of  Peda-amen,  father  of  Tabathat. 
LXXI  1 1.     Second  coffin  of  the  same. 
LXXIV.     Stele  of  Peda-amen. 
LXXV.     Coffin  of  Babat. 
A  large  genealogical  table  of  the  Mentuemhat  and  Besenmut  family,  extends 
from  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Psamtek  I   back  to  about  the  beginning  of  the 
XXI Ind  dynasty. 

An  annex  on  the  Hammamat  inscriptions  quotes  one  of  Nesiptah  II,  and  one 
of  Mentuemhat  son  of  Nesiptah  I. 

M    3 


1 82  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

MasPERO,  G. — Le  Protocol  royal  des  Thinites  sur  la  Pierre  de  Palerme.  For 
the  first  time  we  are  given  a  quotation  on  official  authority  from  the  early  annals, 
which  have  been  so-  strangely  concealed  for  years  past  in  the  Cairo  Museum,  to 
the  great  confusion  of  students.  This  gives  the  full  heading  of  King  Khent,  or 
Zer,  who  is  stated  to  be  Athet,  the  third  king  of  the  1st  dynasty.  The  name  is 
written  in  a  cartouche,  which  shows  that  such  belongs  to  the  beginning  of  the 
kingdom.  The  royal  mother's  name  follows,  Klienfet-  with  the  figure  of  a  priestess 
determinative,  Hapi,  with  the  usual  female  figure  determinative.  This  word  Kheufet 
seems,  by  the  figure  after  it,  to  be  a  title.  Khenf  is  a  bread  offering,  clearly 
connected  with  khenp  to  offer,  or  present,  and  klienp  an  animal  offered  in  sacrifice. 
It  seems,  then,  to  mean  the  "Offering  priestess,  Hapi."  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  is 
inclined  to  make  one  name  of  it,  Khenfct-hapi,  regardless  of  the  determinative  of 
the  priestess.  This  passage  is  quoted  as  explaining  the  portion  of  the  protocol  of 
Neteren  on  the  Palermo  stone,  which  evidently  shows  the  beginning  of  his  cartouche, 
hitherto  misinterpreted  as  part  of  his  mother's  name.  Whenever  the  world  is  at 
last  allowed  the  use  of  these  most  important  documents,  so  long  concealed,  there 
will  be  many  enquiries  to  be  followed  out  from  them. 

Sottas,  H. — Atude  sur  la  stele  C  14  du  Louvre.  This  is  the  well-known  stele 
of  Mertisen  describing  the  variety  of  artistic  knowledge.  The  paper  is  a  comparison 
of  the  translation  by  M.  Madsen  {Sphinx,  1909,  242)  and  Sir  Gaston  Maspero 
{T.S.B.A.,  1877,  55S),  with  reference  also  to  those  of  Erman  and  Brugsch.  No  new 
result  of  importance  is  reached. 

Spiegelberg,  W. — Der  Koenigseid  des  deinotischen  papyrus  Berlin  3080. 
This  is  a  contract  of  a  sale  of  land  under  Euergetes  II.  The  interest  of  it  is  in 
the  formula  of  the  oath  by  Pharaoh  which  concludes  it,  and  a  reference  to  the 
inundation  of  year  37  to  38.  This  is  so  stated  because  the  full  height  of  the  Nile 
then  was  at  the  junction  of  the  two  years. 

Spiegelberc;,   W. — Eiti  Denkstcin  aus  Leontopolis.     This   is   a   tablet  with 

a  king  offering  to  a  lion  god  and  a  god  of  human  form  with  a  lion's  head.  The 

brief  inscription  shows  that  this  is  the  lion-god  Mau-hes  of  Tell  Mokdam.  The 
stele  is  at  Hildesheim. 

Mercer,  S.  A.  B. —  The  Gorringe  Collection  of  Egyptian  Antiquities.  The 
objects  collected  by  the  late  Commander  Gorringe,  when  he  moved  the  obelisk 
from  Alexandria  to  New  York,  have  been  lost  to  sight,  but  are  now  found  and 
here  described.  The  main  piece  is  a  fine  stele  of  about  the  time  of  Sety  I,  showing 
the  royal  scribe,  keeper  of  the  harim,  Ptahmes  son  of  Any,  offering  to  Osiris. 
Below  the  scene  are  seventeen  lines  of  ncsut  da  hetep  and  speech  of  the  deceased. 
The  stele  was  published  from  a  copy  in  Recueil  1905,  p.  29;  but  not  quite  correctly, 
as  it  was  then  lost  to  sight.  There  arc,  besides,  two  limestone  sphinxes,  a  statue 
of  Rameses  II,  many  fine  bronzes,  about  fifty  amulets,  some  scarabs,  terra- 
cottas, etc.     It  is  intended  to  publish  photographs  before  long,  in  this  Journal. 

SCHEIL,  V. — Nouvelles  notes  depigraphic  et  d'archc'ologie  Assyriennes.  A  bronze 
tray  on  wheels,  22  inches  square,  5i  inches  deep,  was  found  at  Toprak-Kaleh. 
The  four  wheels  are  6  inches  across,  and  there  is  a  handle  at  one  end  of  the  tray. 
It  appears  to  be  a  piece  of  temple  furniture,  analogous  to  the  bases  of  brass  upon 
four  wheels  for  carrying  the  lavers  in  Solomon's  temple.  Those,  however,  were 
three  or  four  times  the  size  of  this  Assyrian  example.  It  is  strangely  termed 
a  chariot,  by  P6re  Scheil. 


Reaieil  de  Travaitx.  1 83 

The  three  ''  kings  of  the  East,"  whose  names  first  appear  in  late  Christian 
apocryphal  writings,  are  here  shown  to  occur  in  a  Jewish  magical  formula  as 
Caspar,  Kelia'mar,  Bleithazar.  Kleia'mar  is  an  inversion  of  Melchior,  obviously 
formed  from  Melek;  Bleithazar  is  a  lisping  form  of  Belshazar ;  and  Oaspar,  it  is 
suggested,  is  an  inversion  of  Rabshakeh,  such  a  play  on  words  is  even  directed  in 
the  magic  formula,  "  whisper  in  the  reversed  order." 

Gardiner,  Alan  H. — Notes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe.  This  article  is  mainly 
occupied  with  critical  discussion  of  details  of  the  text,  in  view  of  fresh  material. 
It  concludes  with  a  valuable  estimate  of  the  general  character  of  the  composition. 
The  story  of  Sinuhe  (or  Sanehat)  was  one  of  the  most  popular  in  the  New 
Kingdom,  and  allusions  to  its  phrases  are  even  found  in  monumental  inscriptions. 
In  the  style  of  it  "it  is  a  classic  because  it  displays  with  inimitable  directness  the 
mixed  naivete  and  subtilty  of  the  old  Egyptian  character,  its  directness  of  vision, 
its  pomposity,  its  reverence,  and  its  humour."  These  characteristics  are  just  what 
belong  to  the  modern  Egyptian.  The  authenticity  of  the  description  of  the  travels 
in  Syria  is  much  doubted,  mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  only  place  named  is 
Byblos,  which  was  well  known  and  frequented  by  Egyptians.  This  seems  hyper- 
critical, for  Sanehat  would  be  most  likely  to  go  where  he  could  hear  about  Egypt, 
without  being  in  the  least  under  the  Egyptians.  The  absence  of  the  names  of  less 
known  places  is  of  no  more  discredit  than  if  an  Englishman  said  he  wandered 
through  France  until  he  reached  Bordeaux.  The  date  of  writing,  it  is  agreed,  is 
early  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  as  a  MS.  of  the  close  of  that  dynasty  is  "  some  distance 
removed  from  the  archetype."  The  form  of  the  tale  is  so  similar  to  the  auto- 
biographies in  tombs,  that  the  nucleus  of  it  may  well  be  derived  from  such  a  tomb 
inscription. 

Lac.\u,  Pierre. —  Textes  Religieux.  Texts  from  four  sarcophagi  of  Bersheh, 
arranged  in  parallel  lines. 

RiNGELMANN,  MAX. — Essai  sur  r Histoire  du  Gdnie  Rural  en  Phenicie  et  dans 
ks  colonies  Pheniciennes.  Chap.  i.  Mobilier.  Rough  illustrations  are  given  of 
various  pottery  forms,  without  the  least  hint  of  historical  discrimination  or  dating. 
Periods  from  800  li.C.  to  Roman  are  all  mixed  together ;  and  types  which  are 
usual  in  Egypt  and  elsewhere,  under  Graeco- Roman  influence,  are  quoted 
without  discrimination  as  Punic.  When  archaeology  is  thus  ignored,  only  confusion 
can  result. 

Vol.  XXXVII,  Liv.   1-2,   1915. 

M.\SPERO,  G. — Les  Monuvients  tLgyptiens  du  Musce  de  Marseille.  This 
further  instalment  of  long  detailed  descri[)tions  deals  with  wooden  sarcophagi  of 
(6o)  Imhetep  son  of  Onkh-hetemt  born  of  Tenteri  ;  (61)  fragments  with  forged 
inscriptions ;  (62)  panel  with  two  mythological  serpents,  Nehub  (perhaps  = 
Nehebka)  and  Qesr  (or  the  lance) ;  (63)  lid  of  a  case  of  Khet  son  of  Pemeraun  ; 
(64)  coffin  of  Hernezatf  born  of  Ta-nub-ne-hent.  Stone  sarcophagi  are  described 
of  (66)  Onkh-hapi  .son  of  Tada-asar  or  Thent-asar,  the  variation  of  name  is 
curious  ;  (67)  of  Penast  son  of  Smataui  and  Tasmataui ;  reused  later  for  Peda-asar 
son  of  Ptda-her-pa-khred  and  Pesed  ;  the  long  inscriptions  of  this  are  fully  copied 
and  dissected  with  translations. 

Spiegelberg,  W.     Kcptische  Miscellen.     On  some  small  grammatical  details. 

M  4 


l84  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

BOUSSAC,  P.  HiPPOLYTE. — Coninientaire  sur  tin  passage  (THerodote.  This 
deals  with  the  mythological  answer  given  to  the  geographical  questions  of  Herodotos 
on  the  source  of  the  Nile.  The  most  curious  point  is  that  the  idea  of  the  Nile 
arising  at  the  First  Cataract  was  still  held  in  Cairo  at  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  when  the  Diwan  in  Cairo  wrote:  "From  the  place  called  Shellal 
where  the  Nile  takes  its  rise,  to  the  mouths  in  the  two  seas  by  the  towns  of  Rosetta 
and  Damietta." 

BousSAC,  P.  HiPPOLYTE. — Le  Culte  de  la  Diesse  Bast  dans  I'ltalie.  The 
extent  of  the  worship  of  Isis  in  Italy  was  considerable  ;  not  only  are  there  many 
temples  of  hers  at  Rome,  but  also  at  Pozzuoli,  Tivoli,  Tusculum,  Nemi,  Ostia, 
Porte  d'Anzio,  and  Pompeii.  Along  side  of  this  Isis  worship  appear  also  figures  of 
Bast,  suggesting  a  strong  Bubastite  influence  among  the  Alexandrian. settlers.  At 
Rome,  Ostia  and  Nemi,  Isis  and  Bast  are  associated,  and  at  Scarbancia  in  Upper 
Pannonia  there  is  a  joint  dedication  to  them.  An  inscription  at  Nemi  gives  an 
inventory  of  the  jewellery  of  the  divine  figures.  Isis  had  "a  diadem,  bracelets  and 
collars  with  jewels ;  an  '  alempsiac '  crown  of  twenty-one  topaz  and  twenty-four 
carbuncles,  a  collar  of  beryls,  a  girdle  plated  with  gold,  two  robes,  two  tunics,  two 
mantles."  Bast  had  "  a  robe  of  silk,  purple  and  turquoise  green,  a  shirt  of  purple 
linen  with  two  girdles,  one  gilt,  two  robes,  two  mantles,  a  tunic  and  a  white  dress." 
At  Ostia  an  altar  is  dedicated  "  to  Isis,  to  Bubastis.  A  silver  statue  of  Venus,  of 
a  pound  and  a  half  in  weight,  a  silver  crown  of  three  ounces  three  scruples,  an 
alempsiac  crown  of  five  ounces  and  eight  scruples,  Caltilia  Diodora  Bubastiaca  has 
given  it  by  bequest."  At  Pompeii  is  a  scene  of  a  priest  reciting  from  a  papyrus, 
in  front  of  a  stele  surmounted  by  a  cat. 

Cledat,  Jean. — Notes  sur  I'isthvie  de  Suez.  From  Pelusium  comes  (i)  a 
fragment  of  a  red  sandstone  shrine ;  also  (2)  a  black  granite  weight  of  Nekht- 
nebef,  of  thirty-two  kilogrammes.  This  is  exactly  the  Roman  centumpondium, 
though  by  its  date  it  is  probably  the  earlier  form  of  the  same  standard,  the  Aeginetan, 
fifty  minae.  (3)  A  fragment  of  a  marble  inscription  in  Latin,  names  IVLIVS  L  .  .  .  . 
perhaps  the  Prefect  Julius  Lupus  in  A.D.  71.  (4)  At  Kasr  et-Tineh  is  a  large  ruin 
of  an  Arab  palace  of  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century,  like  the  tomb  of  Kalaun  at 
Cairo.  Near  it  is  an  Arab  cemetery,  with  the  graves  under  water  level.  This 
shows  that  the  north  coast  of  the  Delta  continued  to  sink  more,  for  centuries  after 
the  great  catastrophe  of  the  submersion  of  the  northern  Delta.  Two  other 
cemeteries  are  Roman  and  Egypto-Roman,  and  a  third  is  said  to  be  of  Greek  age, 
but  the  inscriptions  seem  more  like  those  of  the  first  or  second  century  A.D.  One 
is  for  Ammonianos  Kelenos,  another  of  Theonilla,  a  third  for  Athanasioudis. 

From  Mahemdiah  comes  a  weight  of  black  granite,  apparently  two  Phoenician 
minae,  inscribed  Tl  in  Phoenician. 

From  El-Arish  a  Greek  inscription  of  Alexander  Severus. 

*From  Qantarah  comes  a  small  portable  sun-dial,  measuring  the  height  of  the 
sun,  and  therefore  independent  of  direction.  In  order  to  compensate  for  the 
seasonal  changes,  there  is  a  column  for  every  month,  with  the  hours  marked  by 
dots  in  the  space.  By  Pharmuthi  being  the  midsummer  month,  this  is  dated  to 
the  fourth  century  B.C.  M.  Cledat  does  not  explain  it,  and  states  that  he  knows 
nothing  like  it.  A  similar  dial  was  in  the  Hoffmann  sale  in  1894,  lot  456;  but 
with  Pauni  for  midsummer,  and  therefore  about  lOO  B.C.  Another,  without  names 
of  the  months,  is  in  University  College  collection. 


Recueil  de  Travaux.  1 85 

From  Wady  el-Reheiba  (Rehoboth)  several  inscriptions  have  been  brought, 
dating  from  the  Christian  period,  with  the  names  of  loannes,  Stephanos,  Sergios, 
Maria  and  Steph  .  .  los,  perhaps  Stephthelos. 

Cledat,  Jea'K. — Les  hiscriptioiis  de  Saint  Simeon.  A  collection  of  all  the 
Coptic  inscriptions  in  the  convent,  revising  and  supplementing  the  copies  published 
by  De  Morgan.  Unfortunately  scarcely  one  of  them  is  complete,  and  most  are 
badly  effaced. 

Kees,  Hermann. — Eiiie  Liste  Memphitischer  Cotter  im  Tempel  von  Abydos. 
The  gods  named  are  as  follow: — (l)  Ptah ;  (2)  Nun;  (3)  Khent-tenent,  or  thenent, 
otherwise  known  as  Ptah-tenen,  or  Ptah-khent-tenen  (Ramesseum).  Tenen  was 
the  popular  name  of  Ptah  in  the  XlXth  dynasty;  and  it  occurs  in  the  Old 
Kingdom  as  a  priest  of  Khent-thennant.  Neit  is  also  called  "  Lady  of  Thenent." 
It  appears  to  have  been  a  quarter  of  Memphis.  (4)  Zed-sheps,  "  the  noble  zed 
pillar."  (The  worship  of  the  zed  pillar  is  shown  by  a  Jcw-priest  of  the  zed,  named 
on  a  niejtat  of  Necho  in  University  College.)  (5)  Em-khent-ur,  to  whom  there  was 
a  priesthood  in  the  Vth  dynasty  (Ptahshepses  and  Sabu  tombs).  (6)  Kherbakef, 
"  under  his  olive,"  also  named  as  a  synonym  of  Ptah  at  the  Ramesseum.  (7)  Em- 
khent-defent,  of  whom  there  is  a  priesthood.  (8)  Khent-aautef,  also  named  in  a 
priesthood.  (9)  Ptah  in  all  his  dwellings  in  heaven  and  earth.  (10)  Ptah  in  all 
his  seats  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.  (11)  Ptah  in  all  his  halls  and  palaces. 
(12)  Ptah  of  foreigners  in  all  his  places.  (13)  Res-uza,  also  named  in  Pyramid 
Texts.  (14)  Her-khen,  the  first  god  here  named  without  the  determinative  of  the 
Ptah  figure.  (15)  Nezem-onkh.  (16)  Aoh-remt.  (17)  Hetep-det.  (18)  Kher- 
bakef, again.  (19)  Res-uza,  again.  (20)  Un-amakhef.  (21)  Shu.  (22)  Defnet. 
(23)  Nepre  and  Hesa,  the  Corn-god  and  Nile-god.  (24)  Hetep-bakef  (25)  Re- 
peats Khent-aautef  (26)  Herheruazef,  "  Horus  on  his  papyrus  plant."  (27)  Her- 
remen  and  Sesmu-am-nudef,  who  appear  later  apart  in  43-44.  (28)  Sebek. 
(29)  Zedui,  the  two  zed  pillars.  (30)  Zenbu  of  the  south,  Zenbu  of  the  north. 
(31)  Isis.  (32)  Nebhat.  (33)  The  god  of  the  gate  o{  per-henu.  (34)  Hapi  and 
Mestha.  (35)  Horus.  (36)  Duamutef  and  Khebsenuf.  (37)  Uashes.  (38) 
Hemaget.  (39)  Merymutef  (40)  Her-tep-senuf,  or  Her-zaza-senuf.  (41)  Her- 
her-qenbet-res.  (42)  Khnem-khent-anbuef  (43)  Her-her-remenef  (44)  Sesmu- 
am-nudef.  (45)  Anpu-am-ut.  (46)  Isis.  (47)  Nebhat.  (48)  Seshat.  (49) 
Sekhmet.  (50)  Neferatmu.  (51)  Sekhmet-tep-aner.  The  reason  for  the  repeti- 
tion of  some  gods  is  that  they  were  worshipped  in  different  districts  of  Memphis, 
and  they  are  here  grouped  according  to  the  districts  which  are  named  over  them. 
The  names  of  these  localities  such  as:  "In  the  harbour  of  the  east,"  "The 
enclosures  of  the  harbour,"  "By  the  gate,"  "Suburb  of  the  south"  and  "of  the 
north,"  "  Behind  the  south  wall,"  "  Behind  the  north  wall,"  show  how  much  may  yet 
be  recovered  of  the  topography  of  Memphis.  This  will  be  discussed  in  this  Journal 
before  long. 

GrenfeLL,  Alice. —  The  Ka  on  Scarabs.  The  great  mass  of  brief  inscriptions 
on  scarabs  are  usually  passed  by  as  "wish  scarabs,"  and  ignored.  This  shows  that 
as  yet  we  are  very  ignorant  of  the  ideas  and  expressions  of  the  popular  language  of 
Egypt,  however  much  we  may  know" of  the  State  texts.  The  extreme  brevity  and 
elisions  usual  in  such  a  small  space  make  it  almost  impossible  to  begin  systematic 
readings  ;  and  the  allusions  and  ideas  of  mystical  nature  are  a  speech  apart  from 
our  usual  knowledge.  However,  to  explain  a  mystic  by  a  mystic,  may  be  our  best 
way  of  approaching  the  subject,  though  some  will  doubtless  quote  Ignotuni  per 


1 86  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

ignotius.  The  readings  given  by  Mrs.  Grenfell  may  be  stated  here,  and  compared 
with  what  is  generally  accepted. 

The  signs  nefer,  onkh,  lies  and  s  are  stated  to  be  symbols  of  the  deceased.  The 
evidences  are  that  the  deceased  are  called  neferu  sheps,  "  the  noble  or  ancestral 
excellencies,"  and  the  onkhu  shepsii,  "  the  ancestral  living  ones."  For  the  rendering 
ol hcs  no  authority  is  given,  but  it  is  already  recognised  that  the  hesy  or  "praised 
one  "  means  the  dead.  The  frequent  epithet  of  ka  nefer  uah,  precedes  the  use  of 
uahein  onkh,  "living  again  "  and  mflot  khern  or  "justified."  It  seems  therefore  to 
be  an  honorific  epithet  of  good  wish  for  the  deceased,  and  as  such  we  should  render 
it  "  may  the  good  ka  be  established  "  or  "  multiplied."  Mrs.  Grenfell  renders  the 
ka  nefer  as  "  the  ka  of  the  deceased"  ;  and  ka  nefer  uah  as  a  contraction  of  uah 
khetu  "  offerings,"  "  may  the  ka  of  the  deceased  have  offerings."  This  seems  a  large 
expansion  of  uah,  and  one  which  docs  not  accord  with  the  common  name  Uah-ka 
which  is  never  expanded  ;  this  name,  meaning  "  the  ka  is  multiplied,"  would  be 
a  natural  name  for  a  child,  in  view  of  the  ka  being  the  ancestral  spirit  of  the  family. 
It  seems,  then,  that  the  wi.sh  for  a  person  "  may  the  good  ka  be  established,"  or 
"  multiplied  "  is  the  more  likely  rendering.  That  the  gods  had  kas  is  well  known  ; 
besides  the  examples  quoted,  there  is  a  stele  of  adoration  to  the  ka  of  Osiris  (Univ. 
Coll.). 

Some  "  reliquary  scarabs "  are  copied,  showing  the  sacred  head  of  Osiris 
guarded  by  the  gods,  as  No.  40.  Others  given  with  these  are,  however,  the  emblem 
of  Neferatmu,  as  Nos.  38,  39,  and  probably  35. 

The  falcon,  with  uraeus  in  front  and  plural  strokes  behind,  is  stated  to  be 
a  sign  for  the  glorified  deceased.  The  evidence  only  goes  to  show  that  the  royal 
soul  was  a  falcon,  while  subjects  were  human-headed  birds,  even  down  to  the 
first  century  A.D.  (Zodiac  tomb,  Athribis).  The  plural  is  no  doubt  to  give  the 
reading  Heru.  Rarely,  there  is  the  serpent  in  front  (like  that  before  the  upiiat- 
jackal),  the  serpent  who  leads  the  way  in  the  desert,  implying  that  the  Heru  has 
gone,  or  is  going,  to  Amenti.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  instance  quoted 
which  might  not  as  well  be  translated  as  referring  to  the  god  Horus.  For  example 
(No.  59) /;^j  neb  (sphinx)  onkh  heru,  is  rendered  "may  Amen  (sphinx)  revivify 
deceased  among  the  glorified  "  ;  but  a  more  usual  reading  would  be  "  Praise  to  the 
king,  live  the  Horus,"  like  the  opening  onkh  her  of  royal  titles.  In  other  cases  the 
falcon  is  used  simply  as  an  equivalent  of  neter.  The  Aakhu  bird  on  scarabs  is 
rendered  as  "  the  glorified  one,"  as  would  be  generally  agreed.  The  translations  of 
"  the  glorified  follower  of  Amen,"  or  of  Uazet,  are  very  probable.  The  Bennu  is 
rendered  as  referring  to  the  deceased,  in  the  examples  69,  70,  Bennu  em  adkitu  ; 
but  these  may  probably  refer  to  the  Bennu  as  psjxhopomp,  the  idea  being  "  may 
the  Bennu  Soul  of  Ra  be  among  the  deceased  ones  to  lead  them  to  the  Duat." 

The  term  khet  or  khet  neb,  frequently  found,  is  usually  taken  to  refer  to  the 
etcetera,  khet  neb  nefer,  which  ends  the  list  of  funeral  offerings, "  and  all  good  things." 
On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  Grenfell  gives  a  good  instance  of  its  referring  to  spiritual 
benefits,  in  the  term  "  making  known  to  the  Bennu  khet  duat"  "  the  things  of  the 
Underworld."  Hence  it  is  taken  to  refer  to  the  magic  ceremonies.  It  seems  really 
impossible  to  define,  except  occasionally  by  the  context,  whether  khet  refers  to 
material  off"erings,  or  ceremonies,  or  the  affairs  of  the  future  life.  It  is  about  as  wide 
a  term  as  our  word  thing,  as  in  "  Divine  things,"  "  good  things  to  eat,"  "  pick  up 
your  things,"  or  "  saying  bad  things  "  of  a  person. 

The  Rennut  scarabs  are  noticed,  as  wishes  that  the  goddess  of  food  should 
supply  the  deceased  with  "  vivers." 


Recueil  de  Travaux.  1 8/ 

Thus,  although  many  of  the  proposed  readings  help  to  clear  the  sense  of  the 
scarabs,  there  are  difficulties  in  most  of  them.  These  difficulties  may  be  solved  by 
a  wider  usage  of  terms  than  we  yet  allow,  and  it  is  very  unlikely  that  we  have 
already  reached  th^f  varied  senses  of  words.  Some  good  reason  for  each  class  of 
readings  needs  to  be  given,  and  some  example  which  cannot  be  read  in  any  other 
way,  if  we  are  to  take  an  explanation  as  established. 

Maspero,  Jean. — Snr  guelqjces  itiscriptions  grecques provenant  du  grand  tevtple 
de  Denderah. — The  lamented  scholar,  whose  loss  by  a  kultur  bullet  we  deplore,  has 
left  here  a  study  of  various  inscriptions  lately  exposed  by  clearances  at  Dendereh. 
(l)  A  dedication  by  Hadrian  on  the  13th  of  Tybi.  This  date  cannot  refer  to 
Hadrian's  birthday,  as  that  fell  on  26th  Mekhir,  and  at  his  visits  to  Egypt  the 
anniversary  was  on  7th  and  loth  of  Phamenoth  ;  but  it  was  probably  erected  in 
one  of  his  visits  in  a.d.  122  or  131.  (2)  A  base  of  a  statue  of  Hadrian.  (3)  Base 
of  a  statue  dedicated  by  the  city  to  Tullius  Ptolemaios,  a  strategos  and  adminis- 
trator of  the  Museum.  (4)  Base  of  a  statue  of  Carinos.  (5)  Base  of  a  statue  of 
Aurelius  Apollonios  ;  third  century. 

Maspero,  Jean. — A  propos  dun  bas-relief  Copte  du  Musee  du  Caire.  A  slab  of 
sculpture  from  an  arch,  said  to  come  from  Koptos,  shows  a  figure  seated  in  a  boat, 
surrounded  by  water  plants,  on  one  of  which  are  two  birds,  and  a  nest  with  eggs  on 
another.  Two  fishes  indicate  the  water  below.  There  is  nothing  in  the  treatment 
at  all  like  ancient  Egyptian  work,  though  the  motives  are  all  known  in  the  early 
dynasties.  Unfortunately  the  photograph  is  placed  in  the  plate  diagonally  to  its 
true  vertical,  which  confuses  the  appearance. 

This  slab  serves  as  a  point  of  departure  for  examining  the  views  on  Coptic 
art,  which  have  prevailed  in  recent  years,  in  the  writings  of  Ebers,  Gayet,  Riegl, 
and  above  all  Strzygowski.  The  endeavours  to  emphasize  resemblances  in  Coptic 
art  to  ancient  motives  are  examined  in  detail,  and  shown  to  break  down  in  nearly 
all  cases.  One  allegation  after  another  is  rebutted  with  good  effect.  Beyond  the 
Horus  on  horseback,  the  lock  of  Horus  on  the  cross,  perhaps  the  origin  of  XP 
monogram  (not  noticed  in  this  article),  and  the  unifying  of  the  onkh  with  the  cross. 
there  does  not  seem  to  be  a  single  point  in  Coptic  art  which  would  suggest  Egyptian 
influence  if  found  in  any  other  country. 

Maspero,    G. —  Un    Excvtple   Saite   de  la    transcription     RIA  pour  O. 

Many  examples  of  cuneiform  transcription  of  names  in  the  New  Kingdom  gives 
-riya,  -ria,  for  Ra,  both  at  the  beginning  and  end.  On  the  other  hand  in  Manetho 
and  later  documents  Ra  is  transcribed  by  Re  at  the  end,  and  Ra  at  the  beginning 
or  middle  of  names.     At  what  point  did  this  change  take  place  ? 

The  transcription  of  the  XXVIth  dynasty  name  Uah-ab-ra  by  Herodotos  and 
Diodoros  is  Apries,  while  Manetho  and  the  LXX  use  Ouaphres,  Ouaphris,  Ouaphre. 
In  this  Sir  Gaston  does  not  take  account  of  Apries  being  really  the  personal  name, 
Haa-ab-ra,  as  Mr.  Griffith  pointed  out.  That  does  not,  however,  affect  the 
evidence  about  Ra.  Therefore  ric,  or  riya,  was  the  Saite  pronunciation  in  the 
fifth  century  B.C.  On  the  other  hand,  Herodotos  uses  the  form  Khefren,  giving 
Ra  as  re.  Diodoros  quotes  this,  but  also  uses  Khabruis  and  Khabrucs  from  some 
other  author,  giving  Ra  as  rui  or  rue.  The  conclusion  is  that  when  the  Greek 
forms  became  fixed  in  700-500  B.C.  the  older  riya  was  still  in  use,  while  in  common 
language  re  was  coming  into  use  and  appears  in  the  form  Khefren. 


C     188     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Alexandrea  ad  Aegyptnm  :  Guide  de  la  Ville  ancieiiue  et  moderne  et  du  Mus^e 
Grko-Romain. — E.  BRECCIA.  Sm.  8vo,  315  pp.,  2  coloured  plates,  196  figures 
and  map.     Bergamo.     19 14. 

The  professions  of  this  book  are  rather  puzzling.  Dr.  Breccia  has  given,  what 
all  archaeologists  wanted,  an  efficient  and  well  illustrated  summary  of  the  Museum 
in  his  charge,  160  pages  ;  also  88  pages  on  the  topography  of  ancient  Alexandria, 
due  from  the  latest  excavator,  who  has  studied  it  for  long.  All  this  is  prefaced 
by  a  sketch  of  the  history  in  28  pages,  and  1 5  pages  to  begin  with  about  the 
commerce  and  affairs  of  the  modern  town.  It  looks  as  if  this  touch  of  guide  book 
was  to  pacify  the  business  instincts  of  the  municipality  whose  name  figures  at  the 
top  of  the  title  page.  Curiously,  it  is  published  at  Bergamo,  has  no  Egyptian 
bookseller  named  on  it,  and  no  price. 

On  the  topography  Dr.  Breccia  discusses  carefully  the  conclusions  of  previous 
writers,  which  he  by  no  means  accepts  in  detail.  The  depth  to  which  all  ancient 
foundations  are  buried,  the  rise  of  water  level  submerging  all  but  late  buildings, 
and  the  covering  of  the  ground  by  the  modern  town  which  limits  discoveries  to 
chance  digging  for  building,  have  prevented  any  scientific  examination  of  the 
ancient  city.  One  certain  site  is  that  of  the  Sebasteum,  in  the  court  of  which 
stood  the  two  obelisks,  now  removed.  The  great  buildings  of  the  Ptolemies  can 
only  be  localised  in  a  region,  but  not  distinguished.  The  Serapeum  is  the  other 
certain  site,  fixed  by  the  imposing  column  which  is  seen  for  miles  at  sea,  over  the 
modern  town.  The  great  catacombs  of  Kom  Shuqafa  and  Anfushy,  the  sites  of 
Taposiris,  Saint  Menas,  Canopus  and  Rosetta,  are  also  described. 

It  will  be  useful  to  give  here  an  outline  of  the  contents  of  the  Museum  as 
described  in  the  Guide.  The  inscriptions  begin  with  a  dedication  to  Ptolemy 
Soter.  Some  grave  steles,  with  figures,  recall  the  grace  of  those  at  Athens,  though 
a  century  or  two  after  the  best  work.  The  Roman  funerary  reliefs  are  very  clumsy, 
scarcely  better  than  those  of  Britain.  Some  papyri  from  recent  discoveries 
illustrate  the  literary  remains  ;  but  such  things  can  only  be  found  in  Upper  Egypt, 
and  do  not  belong  to  the  Alexandrian  discoveries.  Some  statues  of  the  XlXth 
dynasty  found  in  Alexandria  and  the  neighbourhood,  were  brought  there  from 
ancient  sites  in  Greek  times.  A  fine  piece  of  Saite  tomb  scene  comes  from 
Heliopolis. 

One  of  the  rarest  objects  is  a  wooden  stand  supporting  a  wooden  bier  on 
which  is  the  mummy  of  a  crocodile.  This  was  used  in  the  processions  of  the  late 
form 'of  Sebek,  Petesouchos,  and  was  found  in  the  temple  at  Theadelphia,  in  the 
Fayum.  The  great  gate  of  the  temple  is  also  preserved,  with  the  dedication  under 
Ptolemy  IX  in  137  is.c. 

One  hall  contains  the  Antoniadis  collection  of  antiquities  of  all  periods.  The 
more  important  objects  are  a  table  of  offerings  of  King  Amenemhat,  and  some  fine 
bronzes  of  gods  ;  but,  as  a  whole,  it  seems  typical  of  the  show  collections  of  rich 
amateurs, — beautiful,  but  of  no  fresh  interest.  A  finely  cut  stele  shows  the  two 
sacred  serpents  of  Isis  and  Serapis,  different  in  form,  as  they  are  found  also  on 


I 


Reviews.  1 89 

silver  bracelets.  Some  fine  heads  of  priests,  and  a  Nubian,  show  that  a  vivid  school 
of  portraiture  existed  in  the  Roman  age,  which,  while  it  was  Roman  in  nature,  was 
yet  strongly  influenced  by  Egyptian  ideals :  a  mixture  much  like  pictures  in  Western 
style  by  a  Japanese  artist. 

Of  purely  Greek  style  are  some  excellent  marble  heads  of  the  school  of  Scopas 
in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Others  of  Ptolemaic  style  and  Roman  work  are  much  what 
we  see  in  Italian  museums.  A  fine  portrait  head  of  the  close  of  the  first  century  a.d. 
is  remarkable  for  the  beauty  and  character  which  it  reveals. 

A  large  number  of  capitals  and  architectural  fragments  show  the  late  Corinthian 
development  in  Alexandria. 

The  vases  typical  of  the  Alexandrian  cemetery  are  whitened,  with  a  wreath  of 
flowers  in  colours  around  the  body  ;  others  are  of  the  usual  black  iron-glaze.  The 
lamps  of  pottery  form  a  very  large  series,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  when  published 
the  date  of  the  locality  where  they  were  found  will  be  stated.  The  dating  of  lamps 
is  much  required  for  understanding  excavations.  There  is  a  small  collection  of  glass, 
but  not  of  importance. 

Of  the  terra-cotta  figures  there  is  a  good  collection  of  the  moulded  figures 
beginning  about  the  third  century  B.C.,  but  apparently  none  of  the  modelled  figures 
of  earlier  ages.  Thence  the  figurines  run  down  in  style  to  the  coarse  Roman  work 
of  the  third  century  A.D. 

Many  fresco  paintings  of  small  size  have  been  removed  to  the  Museum. 
Unfortunately,  a  fear  of  their  fading  has  led  to  glazing  them  with  deep  yellow  glass, 
which  entirelj'  prevents  the  colours  being  seen.  A  loose  falling  blind  is  a  far  better 
preservative.     The  remains  of  Christian  period  are  comparatively  {e.yN. 

A  fine  collection  of  coins  is  a  special  feature  of  the  Museum,  gathered  with  the 
aim  of  forming  as  complete  a  series  as  possible  of  the  Egyptian  mint  under  the 
Ptolemies  and  Romans.  An  e.xcellent  large-scale  map  at  the  end  of  the  volume 
shows  all  the  ancient  remains  in  red  on  the  plan  of  the  modern  town  in  grey. 
We  all  have  to  thank  Dr.  Breccia  for  issuing  such  an  excellent  and  useful  publication 
which  should  be  in  the  hands  of  everyone  who  thinks  the  ancient  capital  worth  a 
few  hours'  visit. 


Archaeology  of  the  Lower  Mimbres  Valley,  Neiu  Mexico.  1914. — By  Walter 
Fewkes.     (Smithsonian  Institution.)     53  pp.,  8  plates. 

This  account  refers  to  a  region  scarcely  touched  yet  by  research,  but 
evidently  containing  remains  of  a  considerable  civilisation.  A  few  parallels  to 
Egyptian  subjects  should  be  noted.  The  contracted  burials  are  seated,  as  the 
Peruvian,  not  recumbent ;  usually  a  "  killed "  bowl  with  a  hole  knocked  in  the 
bottom  is  placed  over  the  head.  This  custom  is  explained  thus  :  "  Ceremonially 
every  piece  of  pottery  is  supposed  by  the  Hopi  (tribe)  to  be  a  living  being,  and 
when  placed  in  the  grave  of  the  owner,  it  was  broken  or  killed  to  let  the  spirit 
escape  to  join  the  spirit  of  the  dead  in  its  future  home."  As  we  have  no  record  of 
the  Egyptian  motive  for  "killing"  pottery,  furniture,  etc.,  any  clear  statement  like 
this  is  of  value.  Some  animal  figures  (as  Fig.  9)  are  much  like  the  prehistoric 
Egyptian  hippopotami.  Hooked  sticks,  like  those  in  the  tomb  painting  in 
Hierakonpolis,  LXXVI,  are  shown  as  carried  by  hunters  ;  and  parallels  are  given  for 
such  being  throwing  sticks  used  in  hunting.  Later  they  became  sacred  emblems 
among  the  Hopi.  These  similarities  may  serve  to  explain  Egyptian  usages, 
without  any  suggestion  of  actual  derivation. 


190  Reviews. 

The  Antiquity  of  Iron. — G.    F.   ZiMMER    {Cassier's    Engineering   Monthly). 
'9  PP->  J^"-  ^"d  Feb.,  191 5. 

In  these  two  papers  there  are  no  fresh  facts  brought  forward,  and  it  is  therefore 
needful  to  see  how  conclusions  are  reached  which  somewhat  differ  from  those 
recently  stated  in  this  Journal  (191 5,  pp.  20-23).  The  succession  of  Stone,  Bronze, 
and  Iron  ages  is  declared  to  be  a  fallacy ;  but  the  only  ground  for  this  is  the  very 
rare  occurrence  of  iron  before  bronze,  though  long  after  copper  was  known.  An 
assumption  is  made  that  copper  and  bronze  only  were  buried  because  they  were 
cheaper  and  inferior  to  the  valued  iron  tools  ;  also  that  iron  was  necessary  for  cutting 
the  harder  stones.  These  are  assumptions  of  the  old  type,  without  any  evidences 
In  reality,  no  metal  was  used  to  cut  hard  stones,  but  soft  copper  served  as  a  bed 
for  cutting  points  of  emery.  Actual!}',  copper  can  be  alloyed  and  hardened  so  as  to 
be  superior  to  iron,  and  only  equalled  by  steel.  The  author  relies  on  malleable 
meteoric  iron  as  a  primitive  source,  which  is  quite  likely.  The  word  bad-ne-pet, 
however,  though  meaning  iron  in  Greek  times,  was  used  for  haematite  in  earlier 
writing,  as  statuettes  were  made  of  it  by  Rameses  III  ;  no  statuettes  of  iron  are 
known,  but  they  were  often  made  of  haematite.  The  name  of  the  king  of  the  1st 
dynasty  is,  in  contemporary  form,  Mer-pa-ba,  written  with  the  pool  ba.  This  ba  is 
probably  the  name  of  a  deity,  found  on  early  inscriptions,  but  it  may  mean  a  hard 
stone,  or  a  mine,  or  a  causeway  ;  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  it  referred  to  the 
metal  iron.  Many  statements  require  correction,  such  as  "Fall  of  Troy,  1406  B.C."; 
""Iron  in  universal  use  under  Ramses  II  even  for  implements  of  agriculture," 
apparently  based  on  one  iron  sickle ;  "  About  800  B.C.  iron  was  already  freely  used 
for  agricultural  implements  in  Egypt,"  but  I  have  never  seen  one  such  among  the 
bronze  hoes  ;  the  butchers  of  the  Old  Kingdom  are  said  to  sharpen  their  knives  on 
"steels,"  which  are  doubtless  whetstones;  and  quotations  are  made  from  the 
annals  of  Thothmes  and  Merneptah  about  objects  of  iron,  which  is  a  mistranslation 
instead  of  bronze.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  what  version  can  have  given  such  a  mis- 
statement. Altogether  the  exaggeration  of  the  rare  and  sporadic  use  of  early  iron 
seems  to  be  the  only  ground  for  asserting  its  general  importance  before  1200  B.C. 

The  Shinitig  East. — Emily  M.  Burke.  8vo,  167  pp.  is.  Ralph, 
Holland  &  Co. 

This  is  a  fairly  suitable  course  of  elementary  talks  for  small  children  on  Egypt, 
Babylonia,  and  countries  around,  with  31  illustrations.  It  seems  a  pity  that 
teaching  books  should  start  with  oversights  in  the  small  stock  of  ideas  which  can  be 
given  in  such  a  scope.  We  read  here  of  the  Egyptians  being  "an  almost  savage 
nation  "  in  the  1st  dynasty,  when  wealth  and  fine  work  was  common  :  the  builders 
of  the  pyramids  are  called  slaves,  and  said  to  have  been  soon  killed  by  toil,  when 
they  were  probably  relays  of  sturdy  peasants,  w^ho  were  better  rather  than  worse  for 
the  training  ;  the  sound  given  by  the  Memnon  of  Thebes  is  supposed  to  be  an 
original  design  ;  the  usual  mistake  appears  about  mixing  straw  with  bricks  by  the 
Israelites  ;  the  nomad  Israelites  are  supposed  to  have  been  better  brickmakers  than 
the  Egyptians,  who  had  thousands  of  years  of  experience ;  and  in  the  map  of 
Chaldca  there  is  no  hint  that  the  coast  was  entirely  different  in  ancient  times.  It 
is  a  pity  not  to  correct  such  misleading  matters,  although  the  sphinxes  on  the  cover 
have  no  heads  ! 


(    191    ; 


NOTES   AND    NEWS. 


A  STRANGE  development  has  arisen  in  Egypt  regarding  British  excavations. 
For  six  years  the  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt  devoted  a  large  part  of 
its  time  and  resources  to  opening  up  the  site  of  Memphis,  ascertaining  the  topography, 
and  negotiating  with  private  owners  for  rights  to  work  in  their  land.  When  the 
new  law  on  antiquities  was  passed — which  would  deprive  work  in  private  land  of 
half  its  returns — an  enquiry  was  made  of  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  whether  that  law, 
which  was  intended  to  claim  accidental  discoveries  from  the  fellahiti,  would  be  also 
applied  to  the  very  costly  excavations  under  water.  No  reply  was  given  to  the 
enquiry,  and  thus  the  work  was  hindered  for  the  season  19 14. 

On  the  outbreak  of  the  War  all  of  the  British  School  Staff  took  service  at  once, 
and  the  excavations  were  necessarily  suspended.  At  this  national  crisis,  the 
Philadelphia  Museum  (which  had  received  large  returns  from  the  British  School 
work),  without  a  word  of  enquiry  or  explanation,  acquired  from  the  Department  of 
Antiquities  a  site  at  Memphis  which  had  already  been  examined  and  reserved  for 
future  work  by  the  British  School.  No  word  of  information  was  given  to  the 
previous  workers,  and  no  copy  of  the  Report  lately  published  has  been  sent  to  the 
British  School.  Enquiries  addressed  to  the  Department  of  Antiquities  have  been 
ignored.  A  casual  quotation  from  an  American  newspaper  was  the  only  source  of 
information  regarding  the  acquisition  and  working  of  a  site  which  the  British  School 
had  already  discovered,  examined,  and  reserved  for  the  future. 

Entire  secrecy  has  always  surrounded  the  acts,  regulations,  and  concessions  of 
the  Archaeological  Committee  of  the  Department  in  Egypt ;  but  the  suppression 
from  an  excavator  of  all  news  of  giving  away  his  discoveries  to  others,  is  a  further 
stroke  of  arbitrary  treatment.  On  both  the  part  of  the  Egyptian  Government  and 
of  the  Philadelphia  Museum  the  silent  attack  on  British  excavation  is  a  very 
strange  course  in  a  British  Protectorate.  The  British  School  has  never  intended  to 
relinquish  the  work  at  Memphis,  on  which  so  much  has  already  been  done  ;  and  to 
take  advantage  of  the  response  of  our  workers  to  the  national  needs  at  the  present 
moment,  is  a  course  which  could  not  have  been  expected  unless  in  anti-British 
interests. 


Of  our  former  workers  in  Egypt,  Mr.  Brunton  now  has  a  commission  in  the 
R.A.M.C.  Lieut.  Engelbach  is  organising  bases  with  an  Egyptian  gang  in  the 
Aegean.  Dr.  Amsden,  after  service  in  England,  is  now  at  the  hospitals  in  France. 
Lieut.  Horace  Thompson  is  drilling  recruits  at  Cannock  Chase.  Lieut.  North  is 
drilling  recruits  of  the  West  Surrey's  at  Shoreham.  Mr.  Willey  is  with  the  Political 
Agency  in  the  Persian  Gulf  Mr.  Hayter  is  in  the  Censor's  Ofifice  on  correspondence. 
Mr.  Mace  is  in  the  Artists  Rifles,  expecting  a  commission. 

Of  our  friends  in  the  subject,  we  have  to  deplore  the  loss  of  one  of  the  most 
promising  young  Egyptologists,  in  Lieut.  James  Dixon,  who  had  worked  for  some 
years  in  Nubia,  at  Abydos,  and  in  the  Sudan.  This  is  a  sad  break  in  the  small 
band  of  competent  English  workers,  and  one  which  all  who  knew  him  will 
personally  deplore. 


(      192      ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 

The  interesting  account  of  the  excavations  at  Lisht,  which  Dr.  Lythgoe  has  kindly- 
supplied  to  us,  prompts  the  comparison  of  two  heads  of  Senusert  I,  here  placed 
together.  The  sculpture  of  Koptos  evidently  represents  the  king  at  a  much  later 
period  of  his  long  reign,  than  in  the  statuette  of  Lisht.  The  jaw  is  fuller,  the  lips 
more  rounded,  and  the  expression  that  of  a  man  of  fifty,  and  not  of  a  youth  of 
twenty.  It  is  worth  while  to  study  the  differences  of  treatment,  in  the  round  and 
on  the  low  relief.  The  proportion  of  distances  between  the  back  of  the  ear,  the 
end  of  the  eyebrow,  and  the  forehead,  are  almost  the  same.  There  is  a  slight 
spread  of  the  inner  side  of  the  eyes  on  the  relief  in  order  to  show  the  whole  ;  but 
there  is  less  difference  between  the  round  and  the  flat,  than  might  be  supposed  on 
looking  only  at  the  relief  The  main  differences  are  in  the  shape  of  the  ear,  and 
the  shape  of  the  top  of  the  crown.  The  portrait  from  Koptos  is  on  one  of  the 
slabs  of  the  temple  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  which  had  been  laid  face  down,  in  the 
foundations  of  a  later  temple. 

The  results  of  Dr.  Lythgoe  show  how  little  we  know  about  the  course  of  the 
funeral  ceremonies.  That  the  preservation  of  dead  sacred  animals  was  an  act  of 
devotion  we  know  from  the  abundance  of  such  carefully  mummified,  and  specially 
from  the  imitations  of  mummy  crocodiles  on  a  small  scale  which  were  buried. 
Hence  the  preservation  of  a  dead  jackal  would  be  an  act  to  acquire  merit  with  Anubis, 
and  to  ensure  the  divine  protection.  The  offering  of  a  bandaged  jackal  and  a  jar 
of  ointment  would  be  specially  acceptable  to  Anpu  em  amiut,  "  Anubis  in  his 
bandages,"  who  was  the  god  principally  appealed  to  on  the  funeral  steles  for 
protection.  It  would  be  the  direct  emblem  of  that  aspect  of  the  god.  When  such 
an  emblem  was  placed  with  the  figures  of  the  king  it  would  be  a  special  appeal  to 
Anubis  to  ensure  his  care  for  the  king.  There  is  also  another  sense  possible, 
suggested  by  the  emblem  being  placed  with  the  deceased  Osiris  in  his  shrine,  at 
the  judgment  scene ;  it  may  be  taken  as  a  pledge  that  the  deceased  has  been 
perfectly  preserved  in  his  mummifying,  even  as  the  Anubis  figure  itself  These 
discoveries  show  how  carefully  excavators  should  search  the  area  of  work,  where 
some  of  the  best  results  may  be  hidden  or  lost  in  any  perfunctory  clearance. 


."    MEETINGS  OF  RESEARCH  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATION. 

Prof.  Petrie  will  welcome  members  of  the  Research  Students'  Association  and 
other  friends  at  the  Egyptian  Collection,  University  College,  on  Nov.  15  and  Dec.  15, 
at  3  to  4  p.m.     It  is  hoped  to  resume  the  usual  meetings  after  Christmas. 


k 


SENUSERT 


KOPTOS,     UNIVERSITY    COLLEGE,     LONDON. 


-v 


-v 


SENUSERT    I.         LISHT.     METROPOLITAN     MUSEUM.     NEW    YORK. 


e/ 


ANCIENT 
EGYPT 


1916. 


Part  I. 


CONTENTS. 


1.  Egypt  in  the  Grail  Romanck. 

M.  A.  Murray. 

2.  French  anij  Italian  Egyptology. 

Joseph  Offord. 

3.  The  Grenfell  Scarabs. 

Alice  Grenfell. 

4.  The  End  of  the  Hittites. 

VV.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 

5.  Periodicals: — Annales  du  Service. 

6.  Reviews. 

7.  Notes  and  New.s. 

8.  The  Portraits. 


EDITOR,   PROF.  FLINDERS  PETRIE,  F.R.S.,  F.B.A. 


Yearly,  7/.  Post  Free. 


(Quarterly  Part,  2s. 


MACMILLAN    AND   CO., 
LONDON     AND     NEW     YORK; 

AND 

BRITISH     SCHOOL     OF     ARCHAEOLOGY     IN     EGYPT, 
University  College,  Gower  Street,  London. 


Ancient  Egypt.     Net  price  of  each  number  from  booksellers  is  2s. 
Subscriptions  for  the  four  quarterl>-  parts,  prepaid,  fX)st  free,  js.,  are  received  by 

Hon.  Sec.  "  Ancient  Egypt "  (H.  Flinders  Petrie),  University  College,  Gower 

Street,  London,  W.C. 

Books  for  review,  papers  offered  for  insertion,  or  news,  should  be  addressed : — 
Editor  of  "  Ancient  Eg>pt," 

University  College,  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C. 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


THE   EGYPTIAN   ELEMENTS    IN    THE   GRAIL   ROMANCE. 

In  the  series  of  legends  of  which  the  Grail  romance  is  composed,  there  is  a 
tradition  concerning  Joseph  of  Arimathaea.  Skeat  has  pointed  out  that  this 
tradition  is  separable  into  two  distinct  versions ;  one,  he  says,  is  "  legendary  and 
does  not  greatly  transgress  the  bounds  of  probability,"  while  the  other  he  stig- 
matises as  "  purely  fabulous  and  obviously  of  later  invention." 

Both  accounts  begin  with  the  imprisonment  of  Joseph  after  the  Crucifixion, 
and  his  release  by  Vespasian.  In  the  "legendary"  version  Joseph  joins  St.  Philip, 
is  baptised  by  him,  accompanies  him  to  Gaul,  and  is  sent  by  him  to  convert  Britain. 
But  it  is  with  the  so-called  "  fabulous "  version  that  I  am  concerned,  as  I  hope  to 
prove  that  it  originated  in  Egypt. 

This  version  appears,  in  spite  of  its  incoherence,  to  be  a  solid  block — if  I  may 
so  e.xpress  myself — of  otherwise  unrecorded  history.  It  is  evidently  composed  of 
tliree  distinct  portions  :  (i)  In  the  first  is  the  account  of  the  war  between  the  kings 
of  Sarras  and  Babylon,  called  respectively  Evalach  and  Tholome,  ending  with  the 
defeat  and  death  of  Tholome.  In  this  the  part  which  Joseph  plays  is  so  small  that 
it  could  have  been  omitted  without  injuring  the  story.  (2)  The  second  part  is 
devoted  to  Joseph  and  his  son  Josephes ;  and  to  this  belongs  probably  the  long 
account  of  the  consecration  of  Josephes,  though  it  really  occurs  in  the  legend  itself 
almost  at  the  beginning  of  the  story,  perhaps  for  chronological  reasons.  The 
sermons  of  Joseph  and  the  dreams  of  Evalach  also  belong  really  to  the  second  part, 
which  is  in  its  essence  the  narrative  of  the  conversion  of  that  district  of  Egypt  to 
Christianity.  (3)  The  third  part  gives  the  adventures  of  Mordrayns  and  Nasciens, 
after  the  departure  of  Joseph  and  his  little  company  of  Christians,  and  ends  with 
the  re-union  of  all  the  dramatis personae  in  Great  Britain.  The  third  part  does  not 
seem  to  have  had  any  real  connection  originally  with  the  first,  but  by  the  simple 
expedient  of  changing  the  names  of  Evalach  and  Seraphe  in  baptism  to  Mordrayns 
and  Nasciens,  the  two  legends  are  fused  into  one.  Malory,  however,  looks  upon 
Evalach  and  "  Mordrams "  as  two  distinct  personages.  I  give  here  an  epitome 
of  the  legend,  from  the  arrival  in  Egypt  of  Joseph,  with  his  family  and  friends, 
to  their  departure  and  final  re-union  in  Britain.  I  follow  Lovelich's  version  as 
being  the  most  detailed. 

Chief  personages  mentioned  in  the  legend  : — 

Ermonies.     A  hermit-saint. 

Evalach,  afterwards  Mordrayns.     King  of  Sarras. 

Ferreyn.     A  giant. 

Flegentyne.     Wife  of  Seraphe. 

Joseph  of  Arimathaea. 

Josephes,  or  Josaphe.     Son  of  Joseph.     First  Christian  bishop. 

Mordrayns,  or  Mogdanis.     Baptismal  name  of  Evalach. 

Nasciens.     Baptismal  name  of  Seraphe. 

Salustes  or  Salustine.     A  hermit-saint. 

Sarracynte.     Wife  of  Evalach  and  sister  of  Seraphe. 

Seraphe,  afterwards  Nasciens.     Duke  of  Orbery. 

Tholome  Cerastre.     King  of  Babylon. 


2  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

1.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  with  his  family  and  friends,  all  Christians,  leave 
Jerusalem  by  way  of  Ephrata  and  reach  Argos,  half  a  Ica^^ue  from  Bethany,  in  the 
country  of  Damascus.  By  divine  command  Joseph  makes  an  ark  of  wood  to 
contain  the  Holy  Vessel.'  Next  day  they  reach  Sarras,  where  King  Evalach  is 
holding  a  council  of  war.  Evalach  is  a  foreigner  who  had  succeeded  the  old  king 
of  Sarras,  and  had  conquered  the  whole  land  "  iusk'en  I'entr^e  de  egypte."  [A 
variant  says  that  Evalach  had  helped  Tholome  in  his  campaign  against  Holoferncs, 
and  that  Tholome  had  placed  Evalach  on  the  throne  of  Holofernes.]  Evalach  is 
at  war  with  Tholome  Cerastre,  king  of  Babylon,  who  has  invaded  the  country, 
captured  cities,  and  is  now  besieging  Castle  Valachim.  Joseph  promises  Evalach 
victory  if  he  will  become  a  Christian.  The  king  lodges  the  strangers  in  the 
"  spiritual  palace,"  and  gives  such  noble  hospitality  that  the  good  food  and  the 
good  beds  are  considered  worthy  of  mention.  Here  follows  the  account  of 
Josephes'  consecration,  which  should  properly  come  into  the  second  part. 

2.  Joseph  prophesies  that  Evalach  shall  fall  into  Tholome's  power,  but  shall 
be  victorious  if  he  embraces  Christianity  ;  Joseph  breaks  the  idols  in  order  to  prove 
to  the  king  that  they  are  devils.  Sarracynte  is  already  a  Christian,  having  been 
converted  by  the  hermit  Salustes,  who  had  healed  her  mother.  When  he  died 
Sarracynte  had  helped  another  hermit,  Ermonies,  to  bury  him.  She  has,  however, 
never  acknowledged  her  conversion  publicly. 

3.  Evalach  hears  that  Tholome  is  besieging  Castle  Valachim,  with  twenty 
thousand  horse  and  forty  thousand  foot.  He  dispatches  his  vassals  to  Castle 
Tarabe ;  and  before  he  himself  starts,  Joseph  makes,  with  two  strips  of  red  cloth,  a 
cross  on  Evalach's  white  shield.  The  king  then  rides  with  "  a  Ryht  gret  Compenye 
of  knyhtes  "  to  Tarabe,  where  he  stays  for  eight  days  assembling  his  troops.  At 
the  end  of  that  time  they  set  forth  to  raise  the  siege  of  Valachim.  They  pass 
through  a  forest,  cross  a  valley,  and  climb  a  hill  from  the  top  of  which  the  besieged 
castle  is  visible.  In  the  battle  which  ensues,  fifteen  thousand  men  are  killed,  and 
Evalach  is  forced  to  retreat  to  Castle  Comes,  two  miles  away,  hotly  pursued  by 
Tholome.  The  besieged  garrison,  by  a  sortie,  capture  Tholome's  camp  and  equip- 
ment, so  that  Tholome,  returning  from  the  pursuit,  finds  his  tent  and  pavilions  all 
"  to-broke." 

4.  In  the  morning  Tholome  learns  that  Evalach  is  at  Castle  Comes  with  a 
small  retinue,  he  determines  to  take  half  his  force  to  capture  his  enemy,  the  other 
under  the  steward  Narbus  remaining  to  continue  the  siege.  Tholome  starts  late 
and  marches  all  night.  Meanwhile  Evalach  hears,  from  a  spy,  of  the  successful 
sortie  of  the  Valachim  garrison,  and  he  leaves  Comes  with  seven  hundred  horse  and 
nine  hundred  foot  to  make  another  effort  to  raise  the  siege.  Five  miles  from 
Comes  he  meets  a  messenger  from  Sarracynte  warning  him  to  leave  that  castle 
as  Tholome  is  on  his  way  to  besiege  it.  Evalach  then  makes  toward  .Sarras,  and 
meets  Seraphe  who  is  bringing  a  body  of  four  thousand  horse  to  his  aid.  On 
Seraphe's  advice  they  all  go  to  Orkauz  rather  than  to  Sarras,  as  being  a  stronger  city 
and  more  central  for  news.  Close  to  Orkauz  is  a  red  rock  called  the  Rock  of  Blood. 
It  is  four  bowshots  high,  and  between  it  and  the  river  is  a  narrow  passage,  wide 
enough  for  only  ten  men  to  walk  abreast. 

5.  Evalach  remains  at  Orkauz  a  day  and  a  night  to  assemble  his  forces. 
Early  in  the  morning  part  of  Tholome's  army  arrives  before  the  town.  Evalach 
leaves  an  old  knight  and  a  hundred  men  as  a  garrison,  and  attacks  the  enemy,  who, 

'  "Forto  do  in  thilke  blod  thou  bearest  about."  Alliterative  Ly/e.  Skeat.  Early  English 
Text  Society. 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  3 

weary  with  the  long  night  march,  are  easily  routed.  Evalach  and  Seraphe  skilfully 
drive  them  to  the  passage  by  the  rock,  where  the  slaughter  is  so  great  that  the  rock 
is  stained  red  and  is  called  the  Rock  of  Blood  afterwards.  Two  miles  beyond  the 
rock,  Tholome's  main  army  is  seen  advancing,  and  a  pitched  battle  ensues. 
Evalach's  force  ^  divided  into  four  battalions  :  the  first  under  Seraphe,  the  second 
under  tlie  steward,  the  third  under  an  old  worthy  warrior  named  Archimedes,  and 
the  fourth  under  his  own  command  ;  at  the  same  time  he  sends  Jeconias  to  guard 
the  Passage  of  the  Rock.  Tholome's  army  is  divided  into  eight  battalions ;  and 
the  order  of  battle  is  that  the  first  two  shall  go  against  the  steward,  the  third  and 
fourth  against  Archimedes,  the  fifth  commanded  by  Tholome  against  Evalach, 
and  the  sixth  against  Seraphe,  while  two  battalions  are  held  in  reserve.  Evalach 
has  10,300  men  in  each  battalion,  41,200  in  all ;  Tholome  has  16,000  in  each 
battalion,  128,000  altogether. 

6.  A  tremendous  battle  takes  place  ;  and  but  for  Seraphe's  heroic  deeds, 
Tholome  would  have  had  an  easy  victory.  But  weight  of  numbers  begins  to  tell : 
Evalach  is  taken  prisoner,  and  is  led  into  a  wood  to  be  disarmed  and  killed.  In 
this  e.xtremity  he  casts  his  eyes  on  the  red-cross  shield  and,  remembering  Joseph's 
prophecy,  he  prays  for  help.  At  once  there  issues  from  the  forest  a  knight  royally 
armed,  with  a  red-cross  shield  about  his  neck  and  riding  a  horse  "As  whyt  as  the 
Lyij'e  Flow'r."  The  knight  seizes  Tholome's  bridle  rein,  and  leads  the  Egyptian 
king  through  the  Passage  of  the  Rock.  On  the  further  side  is  an  open  space :  the 
white  knight  looses  Tholome,  charges  at  and  unhorses  him.  Evalach  runs  up  and 
makes  him  prisoner,  while  Tholome's  immediate  followers  are  killed  or  captured  by 
Evalach's  soldiers.  Jeconias  removes  all  the  prisoners  to  Orkauz,  while  Evalach 
returns  to  the  fight. 

7.  Here  the  white  knight,  carrying  Evalach's  banner,  is  fighting  beside  Seraphe. 
Evalach  leads  his  men  on,  and  Seraphe  attacks  the  Egyptian  rearguard.  The 
Egyptians  draw,  or  are  driven,  back  to  the  Rock,  hoping  that  they  may  escape  that 
way,  but  it  is  already  held  in  force  by  Jeconias.  Caught  between  two  forces,  the 
Egyptian  army  is  cut  to  pieces  : — 

"  And  thus  the  Egypcien,  be  goddis  Myht, 
At  theke  tyme  weren  distroyed  be  fyht." 

Orkauz  is  so  full  of  prisoners  that  Evalach  has  to  camp  outside  for  the  night. 
Ne.xt  day  Evalach  and  Seraphe  return  to  Sarras.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
end  of  the  first  part,  the  second  part  being  devoted  to  the  account  of  the  conversion 
of  Evalach  and  his  subjects  to  Christianity. 

8.  A  wounded  knight  is  miraculously  healed  by  touching  the  cross  on  Evalach's 
shield,  a  sight  which  converts  Seraphe,  who  is  baptised  by  the  name  of  Na.sciens. 
Seraphe  then  converts  Evalach  and  the  wounded  knight,  who  are  both  baptised 
and  are  called  Mordrayns  and  Clamacides  respectively.  By  the  particular  favour 
of  God,  Tholome  dies  at  this  time  "  with  Dolowr."  Sarracynte  at  last  acknowledges 
her  own  faith,  which  she  has  held  in  secret  for  twenty-seven  years,  and  the  people 
of  Sarras,  to  the  number  of  five  thousand  and  more,  are  baptised. 

9.  To  this  second  portion  belongs  probably  the  consecration  of  Josephes, 
which  I  shall  consider  in  detail  later.  Joseph  leaves  the  ark  at  Sarras  under  the 
charge  of  three  men,  and  goes  to  Orkauz  to  destroy  the  idols  and  to  convert  the 
people.  Mordrayns  banishes  all  those  who  will  not  accept  Christianity.  Joseph 
then  goes  to  Nasciens'  country,  breaks  the  idols,  and  baptises  the  people.  On  his 
return  to  Sarras  he  ordains  thirty-three  bishops :  sixteen  to  remain  at  Sarras,  the 

A  2 


4  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

remainder  to  go  about  preaching.  He  then  sends  for  the  bodies  of  the  two  hermits, 
Salustes  and  Ermonies,  and  buries  one  at  Sarras,  the  other  at  Orbery,  erecting 
a  church  over  each. 

10.  Joseph  exhibits  the  Grail  to  Mordrayns  and  Na.sciens ;  the  latter  lifts  up 
the  "  plateyne "  above  the  glorious  vessel  and  is  at  once  struck  blind,  but 
miraculously  healed  later.  Joseph,  having  explained  the  mysteries  of  the  Grail, 
leaves  the  country  accompanied  by  two  hundred  and  seven  people.  This  is  the  end 
of  the  second  part ;  Joseph  does  not  appear  again  in  the  narrative  till  he  is  about 
to  cross  the  sea  to  Britain. 

11.  The  third  part  is  devoted  to  the  adventures  of  Mordrayns,  Na.sciens  and 
Celidoine,  and  introduces  an  entirely  new  set  of  incidents.  Mordrayns  and 
Nasciens  are  alone  in  a  room  in  the  palace,  when,  to  the  accompaniment  of  an 
earthquake  and  horrible  noises,  Mordrayns  is  whisked  away  and  disappears. 
Nasciens  is  accu.sed  by  the  wicked  Sir  Calafere  of  having  murdered  the  king  and 
is  imprisoned,  in  spite  of  his  sister's  entreaties. 

12.  Mordrayns  finds  him.self  on  a  rock,  seventeen  journeys  within  the  sea. 
This  rock  stands  in  the  route  from  Scotland  and  Ireland  to  Babylon,  and  is  so 
high  that  Wales  and  Spain  are  visible  from  its  summit ;  it  is  a  desert  without 
arable  land.  Here  there  is  recounted  an  incident  of  Pompey's  naval  campaign 
against  the  Cilician  pirates,  whose  headquarters  are  said  to  have  been  at  this  rock. 
Various  supernatural  people  arrive  in  ships  to  tempt  Mordrayns  or  to  console  him, 
amongst  others  the  hermit  Salustes,  upborne  above  the  sea  by  two  birds  under 
his  feet. 

13.  Meanwhile,  Calafere  has  thrown  Celidoine  into  prison  with  Nasciens,  and 
deprived  Flegentyne  of  her  possessions.  On  the  seventeenth  night,  which  was  the 
ninth  day  of  the  kalends  of  juignet  (July),  Nasciens  is  miraculously  released  from 
prison  and  carried  away.  Calafere  then  attempts  to  kill  Celidoine  who  is  snatched 
away  by;  nine  snow-white  hands,  while  a  thunderbolt  kills  Calafere.  Sarrac)  nte 
sends  five  messengers  to  find  Nasciens.  Nasciens  has  been  put  on  the  Turning 
Isle,  where  he  has  supernatural  visitants. 

14.  Flegentyne  takes  refuge  with  an  old  vavasour ;  she  then  goes  in  search  of 
Nasciens,  taking  the  vavasour  and  his  son  with  her.  They  start  as  if  for  Sarras, 
then  turn  to  the  right  and  go  westward  ;  they  cross  the  river  Arecuse  "that  toward 
Orbery  Ran  In  gret  haste,"  and  after  riding  all  day  they  reach  a  royal  place  of 
lime  and  stone  standing  beside  the  castle  of  Emelianz,  "  that  marched  next  to  the 
dwchie  On  that  flood."  This  is  a  heathen  country.  Next  day  they  ride  five  leagues 
and  arrive  in  the  country  of  Calamyne,  where  nard,  cinnamon  and  balm  are  found. 
On  the  third  day  they  come  to  the  city  of  Lussane,  the  capital  of  the  king  of 
Meotide. 

15.  Celidoine  has  also  been  put  on  an  island.  During  a  storm  two  ships  take 
refuge  at  the  island.  These  are  full  of  Persian  soldiers  on  their  way  to  the 
campaign  in  Syria.  Celidoine  converts  Labell,  the  Persian  king,  who  is  baptised 
and  dies.  The  Persian  soldiers  accuse  Celidoine  of  having  murdered  the  king, 
and  as  a  punishment  send  him  afloat  in  a  little  ship  on  which  they  have  put  a  fierce 
lion.  After  various  adventures  he  reaches  the  Turning  Isle,  where  he  finds  his 
father.  The  two  embark  on  Solomon's  ship  and  meet  Mordrayns  in  another  ship. 
All  go  on  board  Mordrayns'  vessel. 

16.  Queen  Sarracynte's  messengers  arrive  at  Tosquean  (Roquehan),  the  birth- 
place of  the  parents  of  St.  Mary  the  Egyptian.  They  are  informed  in  a  vision  that 
Na.sciens  is  in  a  ship  on  the  sea  towards  Greece.     They  therefore  make  for  the 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  5 

coast,  riding  through  a  country  so  hot  (it  is  now  August)  that  all  the  men  go  naked. 
One  of  the  messengers  dies  of  thirst  and  is  buried  in  the  chief  city  of  Egypt, 
"  where-Offen  Alisaundre  is  the  Name."  They  find  a  ship  in  which  are  two  hundred 
dead  men  and  a  living  girl  ;  she  is  the  daughter  of  King  Labell,  and  the  men  are 
Persian  soldiers  killed  in  a  sea  fight.  The  messengers  bury  the  dead,  then  go  on 
board  the  ship  with  the  damsel.  The  vessel  is  blown  out  to  sea,  strikes  a  rock  and 
sinks,  and  two  of  the  messengers  are  drowned.  The  other  two  messengers  convert 
the  damsel  to  Christianity,  and  all  three  are  rescued  from  the  rock  by  an  old  man 
who  arrives  in  a  little  boat  with  Celidoine's  lion.  The  little  boat  goes  straight  to 
the  ship  which  is  bringing  Mordrayns,  Nasciens  and  Celidoine.  The  whole  party 
are  united  on  the  big  ship,  and 

"  the  lytel  vessel  wente  with  the  lyown  as  faste  Away 
As  Evere  flew  swalwe  In  the  someris  day." 

17.  After  two  nights  they  come  in  sight  of  Castle  Barne,  which  belonged  to 
Mordrayns'  son  and  was  "  In  the  Ottrest  partye  of  his  Owne  land  Toward  the  see." 
The  hermit  Ermonies  appears,  clad  as  a  priest  and  walking  on  the  water.  At  his 
command  Celidoine  enters  an  empty  boat  and  sails  away.  The  rest  land  at  Castle 
Barne,  Sarracynte  comes  to  meet  them  ;  Flegentyne  returns  from  the  land  of 
Meotide,  and  the  whole  party  are  re-united  at  Sarras.  This  would  seem  to  be  the 
legitimate  end  of  the  Mordrayns-Nasciens  adventures ;  but  the  loss  of  Celidoine, 
and  the  search  for  him,  continues  the  story. 

18.  Nasciens  departs  by  himself  in  secret  to  find  his  son.  Flegentyne  sends 
people  to  find  Nasciens  and  to  bring  him  back.  Nabor,  a  wicked  knight,  tracks 
Nasciens  by  the  nails  in  the  horse's  shoes,  and  finds  him  fighting  the  giant  Ferreyn. 
Nabor  kills  Ferreyn,  then  tries  to  kill  Nasciens  for  refusing  to  return ;  he  drops 
dead  at  Nasciens'  feet.  Nasciens'  people  come  up,  and  the  situation  being 
explained,  the  lord  of  Tarabel  thinks  Nabor  was  well  served  for  having  tried  to 
kill  his  liege  lord.  A  divine  voice  denounces  the  lord  of  Tarabel  as  a  parricide  and 
a  thunderbolt  strikes  him  dead.  At  Nasciens'  request,  Flegentyne  buries  the  three 
bodies,  and  erects  three  tombs  called  the  Tombs  of  Judgment  "  in  the  Entre 
be-twene  Tarabel  and  babiloine."  She  returns  to  Castle  Bellyc,  and  Nasciens 
proceeds  to  the  coast  and  enters  Solomon's  ship. 

19.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and  his  followers  arrive  at  the  coast  opposite  Great 
Britain,  where  there  are  neither  ships  nor  galleys.  The  Grail  bearers  walk  dry- 
shod  over  the  water ;  Josephes  spreads  his  shirt  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  God 
so  stretches  it  that  a  hundred  and  fifty  people  are  conveyed  across  upon  it.  The 
rest  of  the  company,  who  were  sinners,  remain  on  the  shore  weeping. 

20.  Nasciens,  after  several  days,  arrives  at  the  place  where  these  sinners  are 
waiting.  He  takes  them  into  his  ship  and  they  all  reach  Great  Britain,  where  they 
find  Joseph  and  his  party,  and  Celidoine  as  well.  On  their  arrival  in  North  Wales, 
King  Crudelx  imprisons  them.  Mordrayns,  warned  in  a  vision  of  their  predicament, 
leaves  Sarras  with  Sarracynte,  Flegentyne,  and  King  Labell's  daughter,  and  rescues 
his  friends. 


I  propose  to  examine:  (i)  the  place-names;  (2)  the  personal  names;  (3)  the 
details  which  show  an  Egyptian  origin  ;  and  (4)  I  shall  discuss  the  probable  date. 

My  sincere  thanks  are  due  for  much  kind  help :  in  the  Arabic  words  and 
derivations  from  Prof.  T.  W.  Arnold ;  and  in  the  liturgical  parts  from  Mr.  Henry 
Jenner. 

A  3 


6  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

I.   The  Place- Names. 

Babylon.  Rock  of  Blood. 

Barne.  Sarras. 

Comes.  Tarabe. 

Damascus.  Tombs  of  Judgment. 

Mordrayns'  Rock.  Turning  Island. 

Orbery.  Valachim. 

Orkauz. 

That  the  whole  action  takes  place  in  Egypt  is  indicated,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  legend,  by  the  route  which  Joseph  followed  on  leaving  Jerusalem.  He  went 
south  by  way  of  Ephrata,  and  journeyed  without  incident  till  he  reached  Argos,  or 
Agais,  near  Bethany,  in  the  country  of  Damascus.  Most  of  the  modern  commen- 
tators have  put  this  down  to  an  ignorance  of  geography  on  the  part  of  the 
"  inventor  "  of  the  legend,  and  have  therefore  made  no  further  investigation.  The 
confusion  has  arisen  from  the  fact  that  the  desert  which  lies  between  Suez  and  the 
Delta  to  the  south  of  the  Wady  Tumilat  is  known  as  Gebel  Damashq,  the  country 
of  Damascus.  There  are  caravan  routes  across  this  desert  from  Ras  al-Wady  to 
Cairo,  Belbeis,  and  Al-Khankah,  which  are  shorter  than  going  through  the 
cultivated  country.  It  was  in  this  desert,  probably  on  the  edge,  as  Argos  was  the 
name  of  a  wood,  that  Joseph  halted.  The  name  Bethany  is  probably  a  local  name, 
which  in  its  spelling  has  been  influenced  by  the  better-known  Biblical  name  ; 
Beth  Ain,  the  House  of  the  Well,  is  perhaps  the  origin. 

The  next  place  mentioned  is  Sarras,  "  si  estoit  entre  babiloine  &  salaundre."' 
This  indication  of  a  position  between  Old  Cairo  (;>.,  Babylon)  and  Alexandria  at 
once  narrows  the  enquiry  to  the  western  side  of  the  Delta.  Here,  in  the  province 
of  Manuf  in  the  south-west  of  the  Delta,  are  several  villages,  of  which  the  word 
Sarras  forms  part  of  the  name  :  Sersa,  Sersmusi,  Sersena,  Sers  al-Liyaneh,  and  so 
on.  The  word  as  written  in  Arabic  is  \j^j^  SRS,  which,  when  pronounced  with 
a  slightly  rolled  R,  would  be  written  phonetically  as  Serras  or  Sarras  in  a  European 
language.  The  legend  gives  a  very  clear  indication  as  to  which  Sarras  is  intended, 
by  specifying  that  the  one  in  question  contained  a  spiritual  place  or  palace.  This 
is  not  the  "  spiritual  city  "  of  Tennyson  but  a  solid  tangible  place,  a  building  into 
which  Joseph  and  his  followers  entered,  where  they  lodged,  where  the  Grail  was 
left  under  the  charge  of  three  appointed  men,  where  Josephes  was  consecrated,  and 
where  his  episcopal  chair  was  preserved  as  a  holy  relic  ;  within  "  the  spiritualities  " 
also  Sir  Percival's  sister,  Sir  Percival,  and  Sir  Galahad  were  buried.  Reviewing 
these  statements  the  "  spiritual  place  "  resolves  itself  into  a  Christian  church  :  in  its 
sanctuary,  mass  was  celebrated,  the  Eucharistic  vessels  were  kept,  and  bishops 
were  consecrated  ;  in  its  cemetery.  Christians  were  buried  ;  and  in  its  guest-rooms, 
travellers  were  housed.  Of  all  the  Sarras  villages  only  one  contains  a  church, 
Sers  al-Liyaneh,  which  has  a  church  dedicated  to  Mari  Girgis,  or  St.  George.  No 
evidence  is  forthcoming  as  to  the  date  of  the  present  structure,  but  that  the 
dedication  is  as  old  as  the  legend  is  shown  by  Joseph's  placing  the  red  cross  of 
St.  George  on  Evalach's  white  shield.  When  Evalach  as  a  prisoner  appeals  to 
this  emblem,  a  knight  bearing  a  red  cross  shield  comes  to  his  rescue,  performs 
great  feats  of  valour  and  vanishes  when  the  day  is  won.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted 
that   this    knight   was    Mari   Girgis   himself      It   must,   however,   be   taken   into 

'  Li  Livres  du  Saint  Graal,  leaf  lo,  col.  2.    Early  English  Text  Society. 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  j 

consideration  that  Sersena,  some  distance  to  the  north  of  Sers  al-Liyaneh,  was 
a  bishopric  in  the  fifth  century ;  for  the  bishop  of  Sersena  was  present  at  the 
Council  of  Ephesus.  There  is,  however,  as  far  as  I  icnow,  no  church  or  tradition 
of  a  church  at  the  place  ;  therefore  in  following  Evalach's  campaign  I  look  upon 
Sers  al-Liyaneh  as  the  Sarras  of  the  legend. 

Since  writing  the  above  I  have  received,  through  the  kindness  of  Marcus 
Simiaka  Pasha,  the  following  information  concerning  Sers  el-Liyaneh  and  Sersena: 
"  The  Church  at  Sers  el-Lianna  is  quite  modern.  It  is  dedicated  to  St.  George, 
and  possesses,  besides  an  icon  of  the  Patron  Saint,  icons  of  our  Lord,  the  Blessed 
Virgin,  etc.  The  church  has  no  history.  There  is  in  the  same  village  a  mosque 
built  on  a  mound  surrounded  by  houses.  The  Parish  Priest  writes  to  say  that  one 
of  the  oldest  inhabitants  assured  him  that  a  great  many  years  ago  one  of  these 
houses  was  demolished,  revealing  the  door  of  an  ancient  church  under  the  mosque. 
The  door  was  walled  up,  and  the  house  rebuilt.  Sarsina  is  not  far  from 
Sers  el-Lianna.  There  was  an  Episcopal  Church  at  Sarsina  but  there  is  no  trace 
of  it  now.  The  name  of  Sarsina  often  occurs  in  Coptic  Church  literature.  Saint 
Liaria,  who  is  commemorated  by  the  Coptic  Church  on  the  25th  Abib,  went  there 
before  she  received  the  crown  of  martyrdom.  A  Bishop  of  Sarsina  was  present  at 
the  Council  of  Ephesus.  I  also  find  that  a  Bishop  of  Sarsina  was  present  at 
a  Council  which  was  convened  at  Misr  by  Cyril,  67th  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  who 
ruled  the  Coptic  Church,  between  A.D.  1076  and  1089,  during  the  reign  of  the 
Fatimite  Khalif  Al-Mustansir  and  the  Vizierate  of  Emir  al-Guyush.  The  same 
Bishop  was  present  at  a  garden  party  at  the  Vizier's  palace  with  the  Patriarch  and 
forty-six  Coptic  Bishops  on  the  23rd  Misra,  A.M.  802  (August,  1085).  On  this 
occasion  Emir  al-Guyush  asked  the  Patriarch  and  the  assembled  Bishops  to  prepare 
a  revised  edition  of  Coptic  canonic  laws." 

I  am  able  to  identify  only  a  certain  number  of  places  mentioned  ;  some  of 
them  are  called  by  different  names  in  different  versions  ;  thus  Oriable,  the  city 
taken  by  Tholome  Cerastre,  is  also  called  Nagister  and  Ouagre,  neither  of  which 
names  can  be  found.  Oriable  might  be  one  of  the  many  names  ending  in  opolis 
contracted  to  opol,  thence  to  able ;  but  as  the  city  is  not  important  to  the  under- 
standing of  the  story,  I  have  not  made  much  effort  to  find  it.  In  some  of  the 
names,  the  ordinary  variations  of  consonants  occur,  B  and  V,  L  and  R,  and  perhaps 
B  and  M. 

Tarabe  is  the  first  place  to  which  Evalach  went  from  Sarras.  This  is  called 
in  different  versions  Tarabcl,  Tarabiel,  Carabel,  and  Carboy.  It  was  sixteen  miles 
from  Valachim  and  twenty  from  Sarras.  The  variation  in  the  spelling  of  the  name 
shows  that  in  some  one  instance  it  must  have  been  written  phonetically.  The  form 
with  final  /  seems  to  be  influenced  by  the  spelling  of  the  name  Tarabel,  whose 
lord  was  a  liege-man  of  Seraphe ;  but  as  Tarabe  belonged  to  Evalach  the  two  can 
hardly  be  identical.  It  is  evidently  a  three-syllabled  word,  beginning  with  T  or 
a  hard  C.  Taking  the  form  with  initial  C  as  the  original,  Tarabe  may  perhaps  be 
found  in  the  modern  Qalameh,  in  Coptic  Kn.viiUA.  This  place  is  about  twenty 
miles  from  Sarras,  though  only  nine  as  the  crow  flies  from  the  place  which  I  think 
can  be  identified  as  Valachim.  To  reach  it  Evalach  must  have  made  a  detour 
either  to  the  north  or  south  in  order  to  avoid  Tholome. 

Valachim  is  also  called  Valachin  ;  and  the  French  version  gives  Evalachin, 
apparently  deriving  the  name  from  the  king  ;  this  derivation  cannot  I  think  be 
considered  seriously.  The  description  shows  that  the  castle  was  very  strong ;  the 
gate  was  a  stone-cast  high,  and  beneath  it  ran  a  river  an  arrow  shot  wide.     There 

A  4 


8  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

was  only  one  other  gate,  a  small  one  in  a  corner,  in  front  of  vvhich  was  "  plain 
Erthe"  for  thirty  paces.  From  the  description  of  the  fighting,  Valachim  lay  to  the 
south  of  Sarras.  To  the  south  of  Sers  al-Liyaneh  is  a  place  called  Al-Barashim 
(in  the  French  maps  Barchoum),  a  name  which  coincides  letter  for  letter,  in  the 
Arabic,  with  Valachim  ;  even  the  E  in  the  form  Evalachin  is  accounted  for  by  the 
prefixed  definite  article.  Al-Barashim  is  situated  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Damietta 
Branch  of  the  Nile.  The  description  says  that  the  river  actually  ran  through  the 
town,  but  this  may  be  intended  to  mean  a  channel  diverted  from  the  main  stream. 
The  military  importance  of  Valachim  must  have  been  very  great,  lying  as  it  did 
either  on  or  actually  over  the  river,  and  will  account  for  Tholome's  anxiety  to 
take  it,  and  for  Evalach's  risking  a  severe  defeat  in  the  attempt  to  relieve  it. 

Castle  Comes  has  the  variants  Coines  and  Lacoines.  These  I  take  to  be 
a  mistake  of  the  copyist,  who  has  taken  the  m  of  Comes  to  be  in;  the  same 
mistake  reversed  is  seen  in  the  names  Mordraines  and  Celidoine,  vvhich  become 
Mordrames  and  Celidome.  The  definite  article  La  simply  translates  the  Arabic 
AI ;  the  word  Comes  representing  the  Arabic  Knm  or  Koni  ^  J  a  mound,  with  the 
usual  latinised  termination.  Mounds  are  so  numerous  in  Egypt  that,  unless  some 
distinguishing  epithet  is  included,  it  is  impossible  to  identify  so  common  a  name. 
There  is  a  Knm  at-Taiss  west  of  Al-Barashim,  but  several  miles  from  that  town. 
The  text,  however,  does  not  give  the  distance  from  Valachim,  but  from  the  place 
whence  Evalach  retreated.  From  Kum  at-Taiss  he  could  return  to  Sarras  by 
keeping  to  the  edge  of  the  desert,  thus  obviating  the  risk  of  a  collision  with 
Tholome's  army.     It  was  on  this  journey  that  he  met  Seraphe. 

Seraphe  was  the  ruler  of  Orbery,  the  variant  of  the  name  being  Orberike. 
This  I  take  to  be  Al-Bahri,  the  North ;  the  guttural  seems  to  be  usually  dropped, 
though  a  reminiscence  of  it  remains  in  the  form  Orberike.  A  proof  of  the  northern 
position  of  the  place  is  given  in  the  description  of  Flegentyne's  journey  in  search  of 
Nasciens.  She  starts  from  Orbery  along  the  road  to  Sarras,  then  in  order  to  go 
westwards  she  turns  to  the  right.  Seraphe's  own  name,  as  I  shall  point  out  later, 
is  North-Egj'ptian.  Seraphe,  arriving  from  his  own  province,  and  keeping  to  the 
west,  would  leave  Sarras  at  some  distance  to  the  east,  and  would  meet  Evalach 
south  of  that  town. 

Evelach  and  Seraphe  betake  themselves  to  Orkauz  (variant :  Arkauz).  It  is 
one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  king  of  Sarras,  and  near  it  is  the  Rock  of  Blood.  The 
position  of  the  Rock  is  given  thus  : — 

"  And  Into  the  Ryht  side  it  laste  Evene  ryht, 
Down  to  the  water  of  Orkauz  .  .  . 
And  the  left  partie  it  Ran  Evene  West, 
Into  Babyloigne  that  Riuere  went  ful  prest." 

The  red  rock,  then,  is  near  both  Orkauz  and  Babylon  and  stands  close  to  the 
water  of  Orkauz,  which  ran  rapidly  from  Orkauz  to  Babylon.  Babylon  is  of  course 
the  great  fortress  which  played  so  large  a  part  in  the  defence  of  Egypt  against  the 
Arab  invaders,  and  is  now  known  as  Old  Cairo.  It  lies  to  the  south  of  the  modern 
Cairo.  Not  far  to  the  north  of  Babylon  is  the  Gebel  Ahmar,  or  Red  Hill,  rising 
three  or  four  hundred  feet.  The  exact  position  of  the  river  bed  in  this  neighbour- 
hood in  mediaeval  or  still  earlier  times  is  not  \ery  accurately  known.  Orkauz, 
from  the  description,  lay  to  the  south  of  Babylon,  yet  within  striking  distance  of  the 
Gebel  Ahmar.  The  first  syllable  of  the  name,  as  in  Orbery,  appears  to  me  to  be 
the  Arabic  El  or  Al,  the  definite  article.     The  only  place,  the  name  and  position  of 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


which  correspond  with  the  text  is  Al-Gizeh,  or  rather  Giz ;  the  word  means, 
according  to  Maqrizi,  the  side  of  a  valley,  singular  j:ap-  gizeh,  plural  -j^  giz. 
From  Gizeh,  which  lies  nearly  opposite  to,  but  slightly  to  the  south  of.  Old  Cairo, 
the  river  would  r^fx  "  into  Babyloigne."  It  was  a  commanding  position,  as  from  it 
Tholome's  movements  could  be  watched.  The  difficulty  is  that  it  is  on  the  west  of 
the  river,  and  no  mention  is  made  of  a  crossing,  which  would  certainly  have  been 
the  case  had  Evalach  had  to  move  his  army  of  forty  thousand  to  the  eastern  bank. 
The  only  solution  is  that  the  passage  by  the  Rock  is  a  misunderstanding  for 
a  bridge  or  causeway  of  some  sort ;  the  battle  would  then  be  fought  for  the 
possession  of  the  bridge.  Great  stress  is  laid  throughout  on  the  importance  of  this 
narrow  passage,  which  cannot  be  explained  if  it  were  merely  an  inconveniently 
narrow  path  on  one  side  of  the  river.     The  neighbourhood  of  the  Gebel  Ahmar  has 


AlCXANDRI 


Places  Named  in  the  Egyptian  Delta. 


always  been  a  traditional  field  of  battle,  for  it  was  here  that  Horus  fought  against 
Set.  In  examining  the  map,  it  will  be  seen  that  Evalach  held  both  the  Rosetta  and 
Uamietta  Branches  of  the  river,  and  apparently  also  the  main  stream  at  the  head  of 
the  Delta.  Tholome  was  attempting  to  capture  Valachim  which  commanded  the 
Damietta  Branch  ;  and  failing  that,  he  fought  a  pitched  battle  for  the  possession  of 
the  river  near  Babylon.  To  anyone  who  knows  the  country,  this  plan  of  campaign 
appears  remarkably  sound.  Evalach's  desperate  resistance  against  an  army  much 
greater  than  his  own  shows  that  he  realised  the  importance  of  the  positions  attacked. 
To  hold  the  river  meant  then,  as  now,  to  hold  Egypt. 


lO  The  Egj'ptian  Elements  in  the  Gratl  Rotnance. 

In  the  last  part  of  the  story  there  are  a  few  names  which  suggest  an  identifi- 
cation with  places  to  be  found  on  the  map.  The  names  in  Flegentyne's  journey  in 
search  of  Nasciens  are  obviously  real  from  the  careful  particularity  with  which  they 
are  mentioned,  but  I  have  so  far  failed  to  identify  more  than  one.  She  appears  to 
have  gone  due  west  into  a  country  which  is  now  a  barren  desert,  but  "there  is 
express  evidence  that  practically  the  whole  of  the  coast  provinces  west  of  Egypt 
continued  well  populated  and  well  cultivated  for  some  three  centuries  after  they  fell 
under  Arab  dominion."  (Butler,  ^/-aiJ  Conquest,^.  \o.)  After  several  days' journey 
Flegentyne  reached  Lussane,  which  may  very  well  be  the  modern  Lucha,  which  is 
called  Luchon  by  the  Spanish  Franciscan  who  visited  the  place  in  his  travels  through 
Barbary  in  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century. 

Mordrayns'  Rock  is  said  to  lie  between  Scotland  and  Babylon,  and  between 
Ireland  and  Babylon.  This  suggests  that  it  was  on  the  sea-route  from  the  west  of 
the  British  Isles,  which  was  by  way  of  the  Bay  of  Biscay  and  the  Pillars  of  Hercules ; 
and  not  on  the  land  route  by  way  of  France  and  the  English  Channel.  The  Rock 
of  Gibraltar  answers  somewhat  to  the  description  as  being  near  Spain  and  Gaul,  or 
perhaps  Galicia  (Gales  =  Wales),  and  being  barren  and  without  arable  land;  its 
position  also,  lying  as  it  does  on  the  sea-route  for  vessels  from  Egypt  to  the  west  of 
the  British  Isles,  is  also  in  favour  of  this  identification.  Against  this,  however,  is  the 
fact  that  Pompey's  naval  war  against  the  Cilician  pirates  was  actually  in  the 
Eastern  Mediterranean,  and  there  is,  I  think,  no  proof  that  he  went  as  far  west  as 
Gibraltar  in  that  campaign. 

The  description  of  the  Turning  Island  reads  like  the  attempt  of  someone 
accustomed  to  a  tideless  sea  to  describe  the  phenomenon  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the 
tide.  The  island  is  drawn  down  into  the  sea,  and  the  water  rises  till  it  nearly 
covers  the  land,  then  the  island  disengages  itself  and  gradually  draws  out  of  the 
water  till  it  reaches  its  original  height  and  breadth,  and  this  happens  every  time  the 
firmament  turns.  No  explanation  is  given  of  the  turning  of  the  firmament,  which 
seems  to  be  considered  something  of  daily  occurrence.  The  mixture  of  piety  and 
pseudo-science  in  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  of  the  Turning  Island, 
especially  the  account  of  the  loadstone,  is  quite  in  the  style  of  Arab  writers;  and 
it  is  noticeable  that  wherever  in  Arabic  we  should  expect  the  name  of  God,  there  is 
here  always  a  paraphrase  :  "  li  establissieres  del  monde,"  "  li  souuerains  peres,  qui  est 
fontaine  de  toute  sapiense,"  "  chelui  a  qui  toutes  choses  sont  obeissans." 

The  messengers  are  said  to  pass  through  Egypt  where  the  people  are  naked  in 
the  hot  months — and  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  whole  action  is  said  to  take  place 
in  the  height  of  summer.  This  part  of  the  country  is  obviously  the  Delta,  for  the 
messenger  who  succumbed  to  thirst  is  buried  at  Alexandria,  showing  that  he  must 
have  died  near  that  city,  for  the  body  could  not  have  been  carried  very  far  in  the 
great  heat.  On  the  return  of  the  party,  they  land  from  the  ship  at  Castle  Barne  on 
the  coast,  which  may  very  well  be  the  modern  Burlos.  Burlos,  lying  as  it  does  at 
the  entrance  to  Lake  Burlos  and  the  mouth  of  the  Damietta  Branch,  was  of  great 
importance,  and  must  have  been  a  strong  fortress. 

In  the  last  part  of  the  legend,  two  place-names  are  mentioned.  Castle  Bellyc 
where  Flegentyne  stays,  and  Tarabel  where  the  Tombs  of  Judgment  are  set  up. 
Bellyc  is  in  Orbery  and  may  be  Melih  in  the  province  of  Al-Bahyreh.  The  legend 
implies,  though  it  does  not  say  so,  that  the  tombs  were  erected  where  Nasciens 
fought  with  Ferreyn  ;  in  describing  how  Flegentyne  took  money  and  workmen  to 
make  the  Tombs  it  .shows  that  they  were  at  a  distance  from  Castle  Bellyc  ;  the 
exact  position  is  given  as  being  in  "  the  Entre  between  Tarabel  and  Babiloine." 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  1 1 

This  can  only  mean  the  part  near  Cairo,  and  may  be  a  confused  reference  to  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh  ;  the  highest,  i.e.,  the  Second  Pyramid,  being  in  the  middle. 
This  identification  is  made  the  more  probable  by  the  fact  that  the  district  to  the 
west  from  Abu  R^ash  to  Dahshur  is  known  as  Tarrabine. 


The  Personal  Names. 

The  names  of  the  principal  characters  also  show  an  Egyptian  origin.  The 
most  striking  is  that  of  Tholome,  king  of  Babylon.  This  name  is  given  to  two 
kings :  i.  Tholome,  who  fought  against  Holofernes,  and  to  whom  Evalach  fled  from 
Syria  ;  and  2.  Tholome  Cerastre,  who  invaded  the  kingdom  of  Sarras  and  whom 
Evalach  finally  defeated.  The  name  is  clearly  a  reminiscence  of  Ptolemy ;  and  as 
it  is  applied  to  more  than  one  king  of  Babylon,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  still 
a  popular  tradition  of  several  kings  of  Egypt  bearing  that  name.  Apart  from  the 
fact  that  Tholome  was  king  of  Babylon,  the  connection  with  Egypt  is  again  proved 
by  the  epithet  of  "  Egipcien  "  always  applied  to  the  army  of  Tholome  Cerastre. 
The  variants  of  the  king's  name  are  Tholomer  and  Tholomes  ;  for  the  final  r  I  can 
offer  no  explanation,  but  the  final  s  appears  to  be  the  masculine  termination  of  the 
Latin  and  occurs  in  many  of  the  proper  names. 

Ermonies  (variant,  Hermione)  is  the  Coptic  saint  ?epuiMe,  Hermine,  Latinised 
as  Arminius.  His  day  is  kept  in  the  Coptic  calendar  on  the  2nd  of  Kihak  (Nov.  28). 
Very  little  is  known  of  this  saint :  the  legend  given  in  the  Synaxarium  is  obviously 
not  historical,  it  consists  almost  entirely  of  his  ordination  by  the  chief  apostles  and 
of  an  encounter  with  the  devil.  He  is  said  to  be  buried  at  QaO,  and  miracles 
occurred  not  only  at  his  tomb  but  at  every  church  dedicated  to  him.  Salustes 
(variant,  Salustine)  is  the  other  hermit-saint ;  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  identify 
him,  but  the  mention  of  birds  beneath  his  feet  should  lead  to  his  identification. 

Seraphe  (variant,  Seraphee)  bears  a  name  which  can  be  traced  back  to  Egypt. 
The  variant  shows  that  it  is  a  three-syllabled  name.  It  is  a  form  of  Serapis,  the 
final  s  in  this  case  being  omitted  ;  the  aspirated  P  is  common  in  Boheiric  (thus  hai 
becomes  tjiAi ) ;  this  pronunciation  was  probably  transmitted  by  the  Egyptians  of 
the  Delta  to  their  more  northern  neighbours,  and  we  get  Pharaoh  for  the  Egyptian 

,  and  the  Coptic  nppo,  <|)eA  for  the  Egyptian       0 .     Serapis  was  also  a  god 

of  the  North,  and  his  name  would  in  all  likelihood  be  given  to  a  man  of  the  Delta. 
Seraphe  was  evidently  a  popular  hero,  and  it  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  some  of 
his  warlike  exploits  were  originally  told  of  a  god. 

The  name  Sarracynte  suggests  a  derivation  from  Saracen,  but  it  must  be 
remembered  that  it  might  derive  also  from  the  name  of  the  town  of  which  she  was 
queen.  The  termination  in  which  is  found  in  several  of  these  personal  names, — 
e.g.,  Mordrayns, — is  the  Arabic  ^  In,  the  genitive  plural.  It  is  found  in  the  word 
Saracen,  which  is  the  Arabic  jjj^  Sharqiyytn,  meaning  "  [the  people]  of 
the  East." 

Nasciens  (variants  :  Natianis,  Vaciano)  is  shown  by  the  variants  to  have  been 
pronounced  as  though  the  second  consonant  had  the  sound  sh,  Nashyens.  There 
is  in  Arabic  a  verb  which  means  "to  grow  up";  a  noun  from  this  would  be  -^li 
Ndshi'un,  meaning  "  one  who  is  growing  up,"  i.e.,  a  young  man.  This  would  be  an 
appropriate  name  for  Seraphe,  who  was  not  only  a  young  man,  but  who  was  also 
growing  up  in  the  Christian  religion. 


12  Tlie  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

The  name  of  Evalach  has  hitherto  been  equated  with  Avalloch,  the  god  of  the 
dead  in  Celtic  mythology,  with  whom  the  name  Avalon  is  perhaps  connected. 
Though  this  equation  is  possibly  quite  accurate  when  the  Grail  legend  becomes  fused 
with  the  Arthurian  cycle,  yet  when  the  legend  is  still  in  its  Egyptian  form,  the 
derivation  of  the  name  must  be  looked  for  in  Egypt,  in  either  Coptic  or  Arabic. 
Here  the  analogies  of  the  mediaeval  forms  of  Arabic  names  must  be  taken  into 
account,  and  of  these  the  most  suggestive  are  the  forms  Avicenna  from  Ibn  Sina, 
and  Averroes  from  Ibn  Rushd.  It  seems  then  quite  justifiable  to  derive  the  first 
part  of  Evalach  from  the  Arabic  Ibn;  the  name  might  very  well  be  ^\  .j\  Ibn 
al-Akh,  "son  of  the  brother"  ;  or,  as  matrilineal  descent  continued  till  the  Christian 
era  in  Egypt,  v,::,-»s-31  j,\  Ibn  al-Ukht,  "  son  of  the  sister."  Either  of  these  would 
become  Avelach  or  Evalach  in  the  mediaeval  European  form.  I  shall  have  more  to 
say  later,  on  the  connection  of  this  name  with  Evalach's  succession  to  the  throne 
of  Sarras. 

The  name  by  which  Evalach  is  known  in  the  later  part  of  the  legend  is 
Mordrayns  (variant,  Mogdanis).    The  interchange  of  r  and  g  suggests  the  Arabic  ■- ; 

the  prefixed  ma  or  vio  being  a  participial  form  common  in  personal  names,  eg., 
Muhammad.  In  the  variant  Mogdanis,  the  termination  an  is  perhaps  the  termi- 
nation found  in  personal  epithets  or  names,  such  as  Rahman.  I  cannot  suggest 
a  derivation  for  the  name  Mordrayns,  or  Mogdanis,  as  the  root  .j^i  would  give  the 
meaning  "  treacherous  "  to  the  name.     This  is  hardly  likely  under  the  circumstances. 

Of  the  minor  characters  of  the  story,  the  giant  who  killed  travellers  is  called 
Ferreyn.  Here  again  is  an  Arabic  form  ^..r  j  Pharaoh.  This  use  of  a  title  so 
familiar  to  us  is  peculiarly  Arabic,  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  being  always 
so  held  up  to  execration  as  one  of  the  wickedest  of  men,  that  the  word  has  come 
to  have  the  meaning  of  "  Tyrant." 

The  name  of  the  god  Appollin  is  also  worth  noting,  for  it  occurs  in  the  Arabic 
Synaxarium  (Hathor  i8  and  elsewhere)  as  ^^\  Ablun,  a  god  to  whom  Christian 
martyrs  were  often  ordered  to  sacrifice.  Apollo  was  equated  by  the  Greeks  with 
Horus,  and  was  therefore  one  of  the  principal  deities  worshipped  in  Egypt.  The 
other  idol  was  inhabited  by  a  devil  named  Aselebas.  The  termination  as  as  in 
other  names  is  probably  the  Latinised  masculine  ending,  and  may  be  ignored.  The 
demon  is  therefore  Aseleb,  which  suggests  the  Arabic  i_^oJ_ii!l  As-.sallb,  the  /  of 
the  definite  article  coalescing,  as  is  usual,  with  the  initial  s  of  the  noun.  As-.sallb 
means  "  the  crucified,"  and  is  an  epithet  not  unlikely  to  be  used  by  non-Christian 
peoples  for  a  demon.  The  name  of  the  demon  might  be  anterior  to  the  story,  or 
it  might  be  a  generic  name  given  by  the  popular  language  to  all  evil  spirits  as 
a  pious  hope  regarding  their  future  fate. 

I  come  now  to  a  name  which  I  approach  with  a  certain  amount  of  diflfidence, 
and  that  is  Joseph  of  Arimathaea.  As  regards  the  "  Joseph  "  there  is  I  think  no 
difficulty,  it  is  the  "  Arimathaea  "  which  requires  explanation.  Here  again  the 
variants  are  of  great  value  in  the  elucidation  of  this  p6int : — 

Arimathaea.  Abaramathie. 

Armathy.  Barmathy. 

Abarimacie.  Barmacie. 

The  form  with  B  gives  an  indication  of  the  derivation.  As  the  story  derives 
from  Egypt,  and  the  place-names  are  Egyptian,  it  is  in  that  country  that  the  name 
must  be  sought.     The  termination  in  i  ox y  indicates  the  tiisba-lorvc^,  therefore  one 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  1 3 

must  look  for  a  name  beginning  with  B  and  ending  with  ///  or  s  (the  soft  c  being 
used  instead  of  s).  A  place-name,  which  corresponds  exactly,  is  Baramus,  Coptic 
BApAUOTO  ;  this  was  in  the  VVady  Natrun,  and  was  the  site  of  a  celebrated 
monastery.  Yusufu  Baramusi,  or  Yusufu  '1  Baramusi,  Joseph  the  man  of  Baramus, 
would  easily  bec<Jhie  corrupted  into  Joseph  ab  Aramacie,  or  ab  Arimathy,  the  ab 
being  taken  for  the  Latin  preposition  ;  and  without  any  difficulty  the  name  would 
pass  into  that  of  the  well-known  personage  of  the  Gospel  history,  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea.  A  further  proof  of  this  derivation  lies  in  the  legend  of  St.  John 
Kolobos  of  Baramus,  who,  at  the  command  of  his  Superior,  planted  his  staff  and 
watered  it  till  it  put  forth  leaves  and  became  a  thorn  tree.  It  can  hardly  be 
a  coincidence  that  two  saints,  with  both  of  whom  the  legend  of  a  planted  staff  is 
connected,  could  quite  well  be  called  Al-Baramusl.  There  is  another  interesting 
point  as  regards  the  name  of  Joseph  :  John  of  Glastonbury,  quoting  from  the  Book 
of  Mclkin,  speaks  of  "  Joseph  de  marmore,  ab  Arimathia  nomine."  The  root- 
meaning  of  inariiior  is  a  flat,  glistening  surface,  and  is  therefore  applied  to  a  sheet 
of  water,  cither  a  sea  or  lake,  and  for  the  same  reason,  to  marble.  The  epithet 
may  refer  to  the  fact  that  Joseph  arrived  in  Great  Britain  from  oversea  ;  but 
remembering  the  part  which  the  lake  plays  in  the  History  of  the  Grail,  and  that 
Lancelot  du  Lac  is,  according  to  some  accounts,  the  direct  lineal  descendant  of 
Joseph,  it  seems  probable  that  the  word  should  be  rendered  "  Lake,"  and  the 
passage  would  then  be  translated  "Joseph  of  the  Lake,  called  From  Arimathia." 
This  is  very  important  as  being  the  earliest  record  of  his  name.  It  would  also 
agree  very  well  with  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  legend,  as  the  Lake-province — now 
called  the  Fayum — has  been  a  marked  feature,  both  physically  and  politically, 
from  the  earliest  times.  The  Fayum  also  figures  largely  in  Coptic  literature  as 
the  birthplace  of  many  saints. 

One  of  the  most  important  personal  names  to  be  studied  is  Melkin,  which  is 
as  yet  unexplained.  Asser,  in  his  Life  of  King  Alfred,  speaks  of  the  "pious  and 
erudite  men,  Gildas,  Melkinus,  Nennius  and  Kentigern,"  but  gives  no  details, 
though  the  mention  of  him  shows  that  Melkin  was  well  known  as  an  author  in  the 
ninth  century.  The  Book  of  Melkin,  however,  is  known  only  from  the  quotation  in 
John  of  Glastonbury,  and  was  presumably  a  manuscript  in  the  library  of  Glastonbury 
.•\bbey.  Many  conjectures  have  been  made  as  to  the  personality  of  Melkin  ;  the 
only  indications  given  are :  "  A  certain  priest  [Soothsayer]  of  the  Britons,  named 
Melkin,"  and  "This  writing  is  found  in  the  Book  of  Melkin  who  was  before  Merlin." 
The  last  sentence  introduces  the  vexed  question  as  to  the  date  of  Merlin,  but  with 
the  Arthurian  cycle  our  legend  seems  to  have  little  or  nothing  to  do.  No  satis- 
factory explanation  of  the  name  Melkinus  has  yet  been  offered.  The  Latin 
termination  may  of  course  be  disregarded,  but  the  Latin  form  preserves  the  long 
vowel  in  the  second  syllable.  If  then  the  name  is  pronounced  Melkin,  the  Arabic 
origin  is  at  once  discernible.  The  word  is  obviously  .  juJlL<  milkiyyln  or  malakiyytn, 
the  genitive  plural  of  7tH<,  an  adjective  derived  from  t«_XLc  "  a  king  ";  it  can  there- 
fore be  translated  King's  men,  Royalists,  Melkites.  This  opens  up  the  question, 
which  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss,  as  to  whether  the  manuscript  took  its  name 
from  that  section  of  the  Coptic  Church  which  held  the  political  power  before  the 
Arab  conquest,  or  whether  it  refers  to  King  Evalach's  followers.  One  thing, 
however,  is  certain  and  that  is,  that  although  the  word  survived  to  the  time  of 
John  of  Glastonbury  (circa  1400),  the  meaning  was  lost  and  juJ3<*!l  t__>U^ 
Kitabu  '1-Milkiyyin  became  Liber  Melkini,  the  Book  of  Melkin. 


I 


14  The  Eg}'ptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

Wolfram  von  Eschenbach  states  in  so  many  words  that  the  legend  which  he 
followed  was  originally  written  in  Arabic,  the  manuscript  being  at  Toledo : 

"  For  Kiot  of  old,  the  master,  whom  men  spake  of  in  days  of  yore. 
Far  off  in  Toledo's  city,  found  in  Arabic  writ  the  lore 
By  men  cast  aside  and  forgotten,  the  tale  of  the  wondrous  Grail. 
But  first  must  he  learn  the  letters,  nor  black  art  might  there  avail. 
By  the  grace  of  baptismal  waters,  by  the  light  of  our  Holy  Faith, 
He  read  the  tale  .  .  . 

'Twas  a  heathen,  Flegetanis,  who  had  won  for  his  wisdom  fame. 
And  saw  many  a  wondrous  vision  (from  Israel's  race  he  came. 
And  the  blood  of  the  kings  of  old-time,  of  Solomon  did  he  share,) 
He  wrote  in  the  days  long  vanished  .  .  . 

Then    Kiot   my  master   read   this,  the   tale    Flegetanis  told." — (Bk.  IX, 
"■  35i-379>  transl.  Weston,  Parzival,  II,  p.  262,  ed.  1894). 

This  seems  to  show  that  the  Grail  Legend  was  in  its  origin  Eastern,  and  was 
introduced  into  Europe  in  Arabic  manuscripts ;  into  Spain  by  Flegetanis,  into 
England  by  the  Book  of  Melkin.  In  both  cases  the  date  of  the  manuscript  must 
have  been  after  the  Mahomedan  conquests  of  Syria  and  Egypt  in  the  middle  of  the 
seventh  century.  There  is  no  matter  for  surprise  in  finding  the  record  of  an 
Arabic  manuscript  at  Toledo  in  the  time  of  Wolfram's  predecessor,  as  that  city 
was  regained  from  the  Moors  by  the  Christians  towards  the  close  of  the  eleventh 
century ;  the  really  surprising  thing  is  that  such  a  manuscript  should  contain 
a  legend  which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  as  essentially  Christian,  or  essentially 
Celtic. 

In  the  quotation  from  the  Book  of  Melkin,  given  by  John  of  Glastonbury, 
mention  is  made  of  "  Abbadare,  ruler  in  Saphat,  noblest  of  the  pagans,"  who  is 
buried  at  Glastonbury  with  104,000  of  his  soldiers.  Here  again  is  another 
suggestion  of  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  names.  Abbadare  might  well  be  .IjJl  ^\ 
Abu  'd-dar,  "Lord  or  Master  of  the  City,"  or  ^jj\  ^\  Abu  'd-Dayr,  "Father  of  the 
Monastery."  Neither  of  these  are  known  names,  but  they  are  analogous  to  the 
phrase  .JL*1\  yl.  Saft  is  so  common  a  place-name  in  Egypt  that,  like  Kum,  it 
must  be  defined  by  an  epithet  before  it  can  be  identified.  If,  however,  a  king  of 
Saft  came  to  England  with  a  band  of  followers,  and  was  buried  with  them  at 
Glastonbury,  we  may  very  well  see  in  him  the  original  of  Mordrayns,  also  a  king 
in  Egypt,  who  came  with  his  army  to  Britain.  Mordrayns  founded,  in  the  land 
of  his  adoption,  a  monastery  in  which  he  was  buried  ;  Abbadare,  if  we  take  the 
form  Abu  'd-Dayr  as  the  origin  of  the  name,  must  also  have  been  the  founder  of 
a  monastery,  and  we  have  the  definite  statement  that  he  was  buried  within  the 
precincts  of  Glastonbury  Abbey. 

M.  A.  Murray. 
,  {To  be  continued.) 


(     15     ) 


FRENCH    AND    ITALIAN    EGYPTOLOGY. 

Since  Sir  Gaston  Maspero  was  appointed  as  "Secretaire  Perp^tuel"  of  L'Academie 
des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Lettres,  the  number  of  papers  published  in  the  Coviptes 
Rendus  upon  Egyptological  subjects  has  increased.  Moreover,  as  Sir  Gaston  is 
practically  the  editor,  it  may  be  relied  upon  that  the  statements  in  the  articles,  and 
the  translations  of  inscriptions,  or  papyri,  have  his  sanction  as  being  accurate. 

The  following  review  of  the  important  Egyptological  essays  gives  the  most 
interesting  and  valuable  researches  set  forth  by  their  authors.  M.  Moret  describes 
"  A  List  of  the  Nomes  of  Upper  Egypt,"  publishing  one  of  the  surprisingly  early 
era  of  the  Vlllth  dynasty.  This  is  a  most  necessary  document  for  the  geography 
of  ancient  Egypt,  because  previously  the  enumeration  of  the  Southern  Nomes  had 
to  be,  as  far  as  possible,  made  up  from  imperfect  lists  of  them  upon  various  defaced 
temple  inscriptions,  or  casual  allusions  to  them  in  biographical  texts.  It  is  true 
that  lists  of  them,  in  Ptolemaic  times,  were  to  be  found  at  Edfu  and  at  Denderah, 
but  then  there  was  no  certainty  that  these  were  identical  with  the  nome  names  of 
more  than  2,000  years  earlier,  or  that  in  early  times  their  number  was  22.  The 
inscription  M.  Moret  edits  is  of  a  functionary  named  Shemaa  who  flourished  under 
Neferkahor  or  his  predecessor.  He  was  governor  of  Southern  Egypt,  and  in  his 
honorary  inscription  appointing  him  governor,  enumerates  the  nomes  which  came 
under  his  jurisdiction.     He  held  several  religious  dignities  as  well. 

M.  Moret  gives  the  Nome  list  as  follows : — 

I.  Ta  sti  (Nubia  or  Elephantine).  2.  Utes-Hor  (Apollinopolis  Magna.  Edfu). 
3.  The  Two  Plumes  (Nekhen.  Eileithyapolis).  4.  Uast,  The  Sceptre  (Thebes). 
5.  The  Two  Falcons  (Koptos).  6.  Ad,  The  Crocodile  (Denderah).  7.  Seshesht, 
The  Sistrum  (Diospolis  Parva).  8.  Debt,  The  Shrine  (Abydos.  Thinis).  9.  Min 
(Panopolis.  Akmin).  10.  Uazet,  The  Serpent  (Aphroditopolis).  11.  Set  (Hypselis). 
12.  Du-aft,  The  Serpent  Mountain  (Hierakonpolis).  13.  The  Terebinth,  Atf 
khenti  (Lycopolis).  14.  The  Lower  Terebinth,  Atf  pehut  (Cusae).  15.  Un,  The 
Hare  (Hermopolis).  16.  Ma-hez,  The  Gazelle  (Hibu).  17.  Anpu,  The  Dog 
(Cynopolis).  18.  Sep,  The  Bird  (Hipponos).  19.  Uabu,  The  Sceptre  (Oxyrhyn- 
chos).  20.  Nar  khenti.  The  Upper  Rose  Figtree  (Heracleopolis).  21.  NSr  pehut. 
The  Lower  Rose  Figtree  (Nilopolis).  22.  The  Knife,  Demat  (The  Northern 
Aphroditopolis). 

M.  Moret  adds  some  remarks  upon  the  functions  and  office  of  the  governor 
of  Upper  Egypt,  pointing  out  by  means  of  another  inscription  of  about  the  same 
date,  found  at  Coptos,  that  the  Pharaohs  appear  to  have  provided  another 
high  official  as  a  sort  of  superior  over  these  southern  viceroys,  because  they  were  so 
powerful  that  they  often  aspired  to  the  throne.  In  fact,  at  the  end  of  the  Vlllth 
dynasty,  the  epoch  of  Shemaa's  viziership,  the  Memphite  race  of  Pharaohs  was 
supplanted  by  a  number  of  petty  princes,  of  whom  the  chief  families  of  Upper 
Egypt  took  the  first  rank.  It  may  be  noted  that  in  this  text  there  is  no  indication 
of  Elephantine  being  the  elephant  nome,  although  Prof  Newberry  thinks  he  has 
found  that  animal  as  a  nome  crest.     Also,  at  the  early  period  of  the  record,  the  nome 


l6  French  and  Italian  Egyptology. 

emblems  do  not  consist  more  of  animal  effigies  than  in  later  times,  so  that  the 
idea  that  all  the  nome  signs  were  originally  totems  is  not  strengthened  by  the  newly 
found  inscription. 

The  hieroglyph  for  the  Seventh  Nome,  whose  deity  was  Hathor,  in  ShemSa's 
text  is  not  a  sistrum  but  the  cow-head  of  the  goddess,  as  it  is  in  the  Pyramid  Texts. 

It  is  now  nearly  five  years  since  it  was  notified  that  the  Cairo  Museum  had 
been  enriched  by  the  addition  of  several  newly  found  fragments  of  the  famous 
"  Stele  of  Palermo."  In  the  Comptes  Rendus  for  last  July  M.  Henri  Gautier 
gives  an  account  of  these,  with  four  sketches  showing  how  much  new  material  there 
is  in  comparison  with  the  piece  long  preserved  in  Sicily.  From  this  it  is  evident 
that  quite  as  many  lines  of  the  inscription  are  still  unpublished  as  were  to  be  found 
upon  the  Palermo  piece. 

M.  Gautier  announces  that  he  is  editing  the  new  texts  in  that  most  expensive 
of  French  Egyptological  works  the  Musce  Egyptien. 

One  of  the  newly  discovered  fragments  is  of  a  thicker  piece  of  stone  than  the 
others,  though  certainly  its  inscription  forms  part  of  the  same  record  of  early  annals. 
M.  Gautier  concludes  from  this  that  there  were  at  least  two  monumental  inscriptions, 
duplicates  of  each  other.  If  so,  the  possibility  of  finding  further  portions  of  text  is 
much  increased. 

In  the  Comptes  Rendus  for  October,  M.  Moret  writes  another  article  affording 
much  new  light  upon  the  subject  of  the  bequeathing  to  descendants  of  estates,  or 
emoluments,  derivable  from  the  royal  bounty.  The  title  for  the  remarks  is, 
'•  Une  Nouvelle  Disposition  Testamentaire  de  I'Ancien  Empire  Egyptien,"  and  is 
founded  upon  an  inscription  discovered  in  the  Necropolis  at  Gizeh,  dating  from  the 
IVth  dynasty. 

Although  of  such  high  antiquity,  the  text  is  quite  a  lengthy  one,  and  without 
lacunae.  M.  Moret  is  particularly  prepared  for  explaining  a  deed  of  this  description, 
because  of  his  researches  made  in  order  to  produce  his  work  upon  Donatio7is  et 
Fondations  in  Ancient  Egypt. 

In  the  present  case  a  certain  personage  of  position  named  Thenta,  whose 
mother's  name  was  Bebi,  enjoyed,  as  inheritance  from  the  said  parent,  two  valuable 
donations  from  the  Pharaoh.  The  first  of  these  was  a  salary,  or  gift,  from  the 
"  King's  house,"  in  the  shape  of  grain  and  vestments.  The  second  consisted  of  two 
"  fields  of  offerings,"  that  is  to  say,  two  pieces  of  land  belonging  to  some  temple  and 
therefore  sacred  soil,  or  fields  forming  part  of  land  assigned  for  the  purpose  of 
producing  crops,  or  nourishing  animals  reserved  for  the  sacrificial  Pharaonic  worship. 
In  either  case  they  would  be  surplus  ground  not  needed  for  the  object  they 
were  first  reserved  for,  and  so  the  king  could  hypothecate  the;rn  for  the  benefit  of 
some  official  or  courtier. 

The  revenue  in  kind  from  the  palace,  as  also  the  plots  of  land,  had  been 
bequeathed  by  Bebi  to  her  son  and  heir,  but  subject  to  a  charge  to  keep  up  her 
ancestral  worship,  that  is  to  sa)',  the  annual  or  more  frequent  ritual  ceremonies  at 
her  tomb.  She  had  enjoyed  the  royal  remuneration  because  she  was  a  member  of 
a  special  grade  in  the  court  hierarchy  called  ncb-amakhu  ;  a  title  also  meaning 
that  its  bearer  was  an  initiate  into  some  of  the  more  esoteric  secrets  of  theology. 
The  lady  could  endow  her  son  with  the  same  emoluments  because  he  also  had 
become,  either  by  devotion  and  service,  or  perhaps  by  hereditary  right,  a  neb- 
amakhu  himself. 

The  Gizeh  inscription,  however,  is  not  the  deed  of  benefaction  from  mother  to 
son,  but  the  act  of  Thenta  setting  forth  his  disposition  to  his  beneficiaries  of  the 


French  and  Italian  Egyptology.  17 

properties  held,  always,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  subject  to  the  Pharaoh's  good  will. 
Thenta,  in  this  will,  or  testament,  divides  the  royal  rent  of  cereals  and  clothing 
material,  or  it  may  be  completed  garments,  into  moieties,  one  for  his  spouse 
Tepemnefert,  who  could  rightfully  enjoy  them  because  she  also  was  neb-aviakhu, 
the  other  to  his. brother  Kemnefert,  who  was  hen-ka,  or  professional  priest  of 
funerary  worship. 

This  division  of  the  annual  payment  from  the  palace  was  to  assure  the 
perpetual  performance  of  the  tomb  ritual  for  Thenta  and  his  revered  mother  Bebi. 
Thenta  could  have  left  the  whole  of  it  to  his  wife,  and  thus  constituted  her  a  hen-ka 
for  his  and  his  mother's  grave-worship,  but  probably  she  was  not  well  versed  in  the 
elaborate  ritual  of  the  Opening  of  the  Mouth,  and  the  meticulous  preparation  and 
serving  of  the  mummy's  offerings,  and  so  Kemnefert,  a  practised  hierophant  in  their 
ceremonial,  was  seized  of  the  services. 

The  two  fields,  or  rather  their  produce,  were  also  assigned  to  the  same  couple ; 
one  to  the  good  wife  Tepemnefert,  and  the  value  annually  derived  from  it  was  also 
to  be  expended  for  ancestor  worship  of  Bebi  and  Thenta.  Again,  in  this  case,  she 
was  not  personally  to  act  as  priestess,  but  was  adjured  to  pay  part  of  the  annual 
product  value  to  four  henu-ka,  who  also  were  to  receive  three  sacks  of  grain  per 
annum,  and  some  payment  sufficing  to  provide  incense  or  oblations  for  the  services. 

The  value  of  the  other  plot  went  to  the  brother  Kemnefert,  also  to  repay  him 
for  carrying  out  duly  the  tomb  services.  That  it  might  always  adequately  suffice 
for  this  purpose  he  was  expressly  forbidden  to  dispose  of  any  portion  of  the  annual 
income  to  anyone  else.  That  is  to  say,  he  must  not  assign  part  of  it  for  his  own 
sepulchral  cult,  but  it  must  ever  be  employed  to  keep  up  the  worships  for  Bebi  and 
Thenta.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  wife  is  not  so  directed  ;  but  the  wording  of 
the  deed  in  her  case  infers  that  she  may  use  the  remaining  surplus  for  her  own 
benefit,  after  giving  certain  salaries  as  specified  to  the  four  henu-ka. 

Compared  with  previously  known  settlements  of  this  character,  this  deed 
affords  two  novelties.  Before,  these  funerary  foundations  had  either  been  bequeathed 
to  the  family  of  the  testator,  who  for  the  due  carrying  of  them  out  became  henu-ka, 
or  funerary  priests,  or  else  they  had  been  assigned  to  a  professional  hen-ka. 

In  this  case  the  wife  and  brother  receive  part  and  the  priests  another  portion 
under  the  same  testamentary  disposition. 

Thenta's  act  of  settlement  also  is  singular  in  that  he  seems  to  have  had  no 
offspring  or  adopted  children,  hence  the  duties  of  funerary  ritual  are  handed  over 
to  his  wife  and  brother,  secured  by  gifts  of  funds  adequate  for  their  performance. 

Another  essay,  by  M.  Hippolyte  Boussac,  is  written  to  prove  the  worship,  in 
the  first  century  of  our  era  in  Southern  Italy,  not  only  of  Isis,  but  also  the  goddess 
Bast.  He  shows  this  by  means  of  inscriptions  from  various  parts  of  Italy,  and 
refers  also  to  one  found  at  Scarbanica  in  ancient  Pannonia,  near  the  Danube.  The 
Italian  records  often  erroneously  style  the  goddess  Bubastis,  using  the  name  of  the 
Egyptian  city  most  celebrated  for  her  cult.  From  Pompeii,  M.  Boussac  produces 
a  painting  showing  the  figure  t)f  a  priest  of  Egyptian  style  chanting  from  a  papyrus 
text.  He  stands  in  front  of  a  high  pedestal,  upon  the  summit  of  which  is  a  cat, 
bearing  the  "  Meh  "  symbol  of  Lower  Egypt  on  its  head.  One  of  the  inscriptions 
discovered  at  Nemi,  enumerates  robes  and  apparel  presented  to  the  goddess 
Bubastis,  probably  for  adorning  her  statue. 

At  the  October  .session  of  the  Academy,  M.  Seymour  de  Ricci  explained 
a  Latin  papyrus  at  Berlin,  which  formerly  belonged  to  Brugsch  Pasha.     It  is  a  last 

B 


1 8  French  and  Italian  Egj'ptology. 

will  and  testament  of  a  certain  M.  Lucretius  Clemens,  and  the  date  of  the  document 
corresponds  to  A.D.  131.  For  the  first  time,  it  affords  us  a  Latin  specimen  of  a  will, 
per  aes  et  libram,  as  fully  described  by  Gaius.  A  Greek  translation  of  a  similar 
will,  that  of  Gaius  Longinus  Castor,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Berlin  Griech.  Urkunden 
No.  326. 

M.  Seymour  de  Ricci's  rendering  of  the  very  much  defaced  writing  will  be  of 
great  interest  to  students  of  Roman  law,  as  supplementing  the  material  of  the  same 
origin  given  in  M.  Paul  Frederic  Gerard's  Textes  de  Droit  Romain,  Paris,  191 3. 

The  following  Latin  inscription,  which  was  discovered  about  two  years  ago, 
at  Ventimiglia  on  the  Italian  Riviera,  is  published  in  the  Notizie  degli  Scavi, 
1914,  Pt.  II.  It  recounts  the  career  of  an  officer  and  official  named  Bassus,  who 
had  been  Epistrategus  of  two  of  the  three  Egyptian  provinces  : — 

M(arci)  filiiis  Fal{ernd)  Bassus  praefectus  cohort  is  primae  Antiochensium. 
Praefectus  cohortis  primae  Brittonum ;  praefectus  alae  Moesicae.  Procurator 
imperatoris  Caesaris  Traiani  Hadriani  Augusti,  ad  qnadragesimam  Ga/tiartim  ; 
item  ad  censum  agendum  Ponto  Bithyniae,  epistratego  Pelusio,  item  Thebaidis. 
Procurator  provinciae  J udaeae,  testainento  poni  iussit. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  gentilicum  of  Bassus  is  absent,  which  is  because  it  has 
become  effaced  from  the  stone,  and  so  is  unknown  ;  but  many  years  ago  a  seal 
was  found,  also  at  Ventimiglia,  bearing  the  name  -Aemilius  Bassus.  The  bio- 
graphical details  in  this  inscription  show  that  the  career  of  the  Bassus  it 
commemorates  was  contemporary  with  most  of  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  which  lasted 
from  A.D.  117  to  138. 

Two  papyri  that  have  been  published  from  Oxyrhynchus  mention  an 
Epistrategus  named  Bassus.  One  is  numbered  in  the  collection  of  papyri  from 
that  site  726,  and  concerns  Gellius  Bassus.  The  other  is  No.  237,  which  is  the 
famous  Petition  of  Dionysia,  and  gives  the  title  "  Bassus  "  only.  The  first  papyrus 
text  is  dated  by  the  editors  as  A.D.  135,  and  they  say  that  the  mention  of  Hassus  in 
the  other  manuscript  concerns  the  year  A.D.  128.  As  these  papyri  come  from  the 
Fayoum,  it  is  probable  that  the  Bassus  and  Gellius  Bassus  who  appears  in  them 
was  an  Epistrategus  of  the  Heptanomis,  or  seven-nomed  central  province ;  but 
some  matters  connected  with  the  protracted  litigation  of  Dionysia  may  have  been 
connected  with  or  conducted  in  other  parts  of  Egypt.  However,  before  A.D.  137, 
the  Bassus  of  the  Ventimiglia  record  was  Procurator  of  Judea. 

Two  inscriptions  revealed  by  the  recent  Italian  excavations  at  Ostia  refer  to 
Egyptian  prefects.  One  of  these  concerns  M.  Bassaeus  Rufus,  who  also  held  the 
pretorian  prefecture  under  Aurelius,  L.  Verus,  and  Commodus.  The  other  name 
is  that  of  Petronius  Onoratus  (or  Honoratus),  whose  term  of  office  in  Egypt  was 
A.D.  147  and  148.  He  is  mentioned  upon  a  wooden  tablet  in  the  Bodleian  Library, 
as  well  as  in  published  papyri. 

The  whole  question  of  the  Epistrateges  is  fully  treated  of,  as  far  as  papyri 
and  inscriptions  had  provided  documents  concerning  them  up  to  191 1,  by  M.  Victor 
Martin  of  Geneva,  in  a  work  entitled  Les  Epistrateges,  published  at  Geneva  in 
that  year. 

Another  memorial  of  a  Roman  Egyptian  official  may  be  added  here.     It  was 
first  published  by  Mr.  W.  M.  Calder,  in  the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies  for  191 3. 
The  Proculus  it  concerns  was  Juridicus  Alexandriae  et  Aegypti. 


French  and  Italian  Egyptology.  1 9 

SER  •  PROCVLO 
II  •  VIR  •  AVGuri  •  TRiBunus 
MILitum   LEGio    III   CYRE 
NAICA  •  IVRIDICO  •  A^E 
^  XANDREAE  •  ET  •  AE 

GYPTI  •  FROCurator 
NEROnis  claVDl 
CAesaris  AVG  GER 
MAnici  proviN 
CIAE  cappauoci 
AE  •  ET  •  CILICIAE 
ALA  AVG   GERMANICA 
Honoris  •  Causa. 

In  the  Bulletin  de  L'Institut  Egyptien  for  1914,  M.  R.  Fourtan,  in  a  paper 
entitled  "  La  Cote  de  la  Marmarique  d'apres  les  anciens  Geographes  Grecs,"  gives 
the  result  of  his  travels  along  the  North  African  Coast,  west  of  Alexandria,  as  to  the 
identification  of  the  sites  upon  the  shore  given  in  the  Periphis  of  Scylax,  and  the 
fragments  in  the  Geographi  Graeci  Minores  of  C.  Muller. 

Muller  took  for  his  topographical  guide  a  British  Admiralty  Chart  which  was 
somewhat  imperfect  and  was  being  succeeded  by  a  new  one  embodying  a  more 
precise  survey.  His  identifications  are  therefore  liable  to  correction,  and  this  has  in 
some  cases  been  carried  out  by  M.  Fourtan,  who  supplies  a  map  of  the  coast  giving 
all  the  modern  Arabic  names,  adding  those  provided  by  Greek  geographers.  He  is 
unable  to  fix  the  port  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  city  of  Apis,  but  considers  the  temple 
to  have  been  at  the  site  of  the  Qasr,  near  Ras  Oum  Rokhan,  west  of  Marsa  Matrouh. 
Since  the  decease  of  M.  Eugene  Revillout,  who  may  be  said  to  have  been  the 
only  demotic  savant  in  France,  the  continental  publication  of  texts  in  that  difficult 
script  has  been  almost  entirely  left  to  Prof.  Spiegelberg.  Last  year,  however, 
M.  Henri  Sottas,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique  (1914,  pp.  141-174),  commenced  the 
editing  and  translation  of  some  of  the  more  legible  demotic  documents  at  Lille, 
and  reproduced  two  of  these  in  heliogravure ;  a  fortunate  proceeding,  for  after  the 
Germans  have  dealt  with  that  city,  it  is  very  improbable  that  any  of  the  papyrus 
collection  there  will  be  spared  for  investigation. 

In  a  modest  preface  M.  Sottas  disclaims  any  pretension  of  being  a  demotic 
expert,  having  only  devoted  a  few  months  specially  to  that  branch  of 
Egyptology.  But  his  notes  show  he  is  fully  acquainted  with  the  work  of  previous 
students,  and  his  essay  of  more  than  thirty  pages  renders  clear  much  of  the 
contents  of  the  manuscripts  he  describes,  and  incidentally  illuminates  several 
matters  connected  with  Ptolemaic  administration. 

The  texts,  which  are  of  legal  character,  are  engrossed  upon  frail  papyri,  and  are 
really  duplicate  deeds,  something  after  the  manner  of  Assyrian  record  tablets,  or 
Latin  military  diplomas,  having  been  written  in  duplicate  upon  the  same  piece  of 
papyrus.  The  strip  was  then  folded  so  that  one  copy  of  the  text  was  inside,  and 
thus  protected  from  damage,  whilst  the  shorter  recension,  or  summarised  copy,  was 
readable  without  disturbing  the  document  by  unfolding  it.  Moreover,  these  and 
similar  deeds  were  pierced  by  a  small  hole,  through  which  a  cord  was  passed, 
preventing  the  record  being  unfolded. 

The  deeds  concern  the  giving  of  bail  for  a  person  who,  unable  to  pay  a  loan 
or  rent  he  had  incurred,  had  become  partly  and    temporarily  the   slave  of  his 

B  2 


io  French  and  Italian  Egyptology. 

creditor.  To  recover  his  freedom  for  a  short  period  the  debtor  got  a  friend,  or  an 
official,  who  for  a  consideration  would  act  as  baillee,  to  be  surety  for  him.  The 
personages  concerned  appear  to  have  been,  some  of  them,  in  the  semi-military 
police,  others  warders  in  a  prison,  and  military  agriculturalists,  a  class  of  settlers 
in  Middle  Egypt  quite  numerous  in  Ptolemaic  times.  In  the  case  of  native 
Egyptians  they  had  already  adopted  Greek  names  in  the  time  of  Euergetes  I, 
245  B.C. 

The  texts  illustrate  the  Greek  titles  of  various  officials,  and  the  division  of  the 
Fayoum  into  three  districts  (or  Merides),  one  of  which,  Themistes,  is  that  in  which 
the  transactions  recorded  took  place  at  the  town  of  Sobek-Arsinoe. 

The  precise  circumstances  which  produced  these  deeds  are  not  quite  clear  to 
M.  Sottas,  who  gives  five  different  views  as  to  what  the  situation  of  the  personage 
obtaining  surety  really  was.     The  first  of  these  is  the  one  suggested  above. 

The  eighteenth  volume  of  the  Sphinx  contains  a  series  of  articles  more  suitable 
for  Egyptologists  than  for  the  general  reader.  It  contains  the  last  essays  written 
by  the  late  M.  Am^lineau;  one  of  these,  upon  "Orthographeet  Grammaire  Copies," 
is  a  little  treati.se.  He  also  reviews  "  The  Sermon  upon  Penitence  attributed  to 
St.  Cyril  of  Alexandria,"  published  by  P^re  M.  Chaine,  in  Vol.  6  of  the  Mt'langes 
de  la  Faculte  Orientale,  of  St.  Joseph's  University  at  Beyrouth. 

This  sermon  of  St.  Cyril,  M.  Amelineau  proves  to  be  a  forgery,  like  so  much 
Coptic  Christian  literature.  As  illustrating  the  vagaries  of  Coptic  authors,  he 
shows  that  the  alleged  letter  of  Pope  Liberius  to  the  Alexandrian  clerics  concerning 
the  death  of  Athanasius  is  an  impudent  fraud,  because  the  pope  died  seven  years 
before  the  Saint.  In  the  Revue  de  PHistoire  des  Religions  M.  Amelineau  has 
illustrated  how  Coptic  Martyrologies  are  merely  copies  of  one  another,  and  quite 
unworthy  of  editorship. 

M.  Daressy  reviews  M.  Henri  Gautier's  Geography  of  the  Tenth  Nome  of  Upper 
Egypt,  correcting  several  of  his  conclusions.  The  matter,  in  Roman  times,  is  rather 
complicated,  because  this  nome  was  divided  into  three  districts :  Aphroditopolite, 
Antaeopolite  and  Apollonopolite  ;  the  old  Egyptian  titles  for  these  subdivisions  are 
unknown,  if,  indeed,  they  were  recognised  as  in  any  sense  .separate  in  the  Greek 
era,  when  the  whole  nome  was  called  Aphroditopolite.  M.  Daressy  utilises  texts 
upon  some  coffins  recently  published  by  M.  Lefebvre,  showing  how  inscriptions, 
apparently  of  little  value  for  historical  or  geographical  purposes,  yet  are  often 
very  useful. 

An  interesting  article  by  M.  Autran  concerns  La  Morale  des  Egyptiens,A  propos 
d'un  Livre  recent  de  M.  Baillet.  M.  Autran  states  that  the  last  six  of  the  Jewish  Ten 
Commandments  are  identical  with  maxims  for  the  conduct  of  a  good  man  in  the 
many  versions  of  the  so-called  Negative  Confession  in  the  funerary  inscriptions. 
Moreover,  long  before  the  time  of  Moses,  the  Egyptian  precept  of  morality  had 
preached  a  good  will  and  human  kindness  more  resembling  the  ideas  of  the  New 
Testament  than  those  of  the  old. 

To  have  behaved  as  a  husband  to  the  widow  ;  as  a  father  to  the  little  and  the 
feeble  ;  as  an  asylum  for  the  orphan,  and  given  clothes  to  those  who  were  naked,  is 
the  boast  of  hundreds  of  Egyptians  in  these  memoirs  in  the  tombs.  They  doubtless 
often  exaggerated  their  good  deeds,  but  that  they  admitted  they  ought  to  have 
carried  out  such  conduct  is  an  interesting  fact  in  the  history  of  civilisation. 


French  and  Italian  Egyptology.  21 

Alexandrea  ad  ^gyptum  is  the  title  of  the  excellent  guide  which  Dr.  Breccia, 
Director  of  the  Alexandria  Museum,  has  prepared  for  the  Municipality  of  that  city 
as  a  description  of  the  town,  its  museum,  and  antiquities. 

In  addition  to^e  review  in  the  last  number,  we  may  note  that  among  many 
Greek  inscriptions  stored  there,  are  several  referring  to  Jewish  residents.  Also  the 
famous  military  diploma,  written  upon  wooden  tablets,  granting  the  rights  apper- 
taining to  a  veteran,  to  C.  Valerius  Quadratus,  who  had  served  at  the  Siege  of 
Jerusalem. 

Among  the  Greek  papyri  are  eleven  lines  of  Callimachus'  fourth  Delian  Ode. 
Although  the  relics  of  Pharaonic  Egypt  are  mostly  kept  at  Cairo,  the  Alexandria 
Museum  possesses  a  good  many,  including  reliefs  and  sculptures  from  Dr.  Breccia's 
recent  excavations  at  the  temple  of  the  Crocodile-god  Pnepheros,  in  the  Fayoum. 
But  the  chief  contents  of  the  Museum  are  its  Graeco-Roman  Antiquities,  including 
coins,  in  which  the  Collection  is  very  rich.  Among  the  sculptures  is  a  colossal  statue 
of  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  a  masterly  bust  of  a  Roman  lady.  The  statuettes  and 
figurines  are  very  numerous,  and  many  of  them  are  fine  specimens.  The  vases  also 
are  well  worthy  of  a  visit,  many  of  them  being  provided  with  a  floral  wreath  in  metal 
work,  once  gilded.  The  finest  of  the  sarcophagi  represents  Ariadne  in  Naxos. 
Dr.  Breccia  reproduces  one  of  the  Roman  mummy  portraits  and  some  of  the 
Tanagra-style  statuettes  in  colours,  and  also  many  of  the  most  beautiful  specimens  ot 
the  coins. 

The  Guide  contains  detailed  descriptions  of  the  Great  Catacombs  at  Kom-el- 
Shugafa  and  Anfouchy,  and  will  enable  any  visitor  interested  in  ancient  civilisation 
and  art  to  pass  a  very  pleasant  and  profitable  fortnight  at  Alexandria. 

Joseph  Offord. 


li  3 


(   22   ) 


thp:  grenfell  collection  of  scarabs. 

The  collection  described  and  illustrated  here  was  formed  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  Field- 
Marshal  Lord  Grenfell,  while  commanding  in  Egypt.  The  photographs,  i  to  102, 
illustrate  his  scarabs;  and  the  drawings,  111-146,  are  from  examples  in  other 
collections  which  serve  to  explain  these. 

The  following  remarks  will  be  useful  in  the  intepretation  of  New  Kingdom 
scarabs  : — 

1.  The   verb   is   generally   left  out,  especially  with  wish-  or  prayer-scarabs. 

Sometimes  a  "  key "  scarab,  such  as  1 30,  supplies  the  missing  word 
or  words. 

2.  There  is  also  a  frequent  omission  of  alphabetical  hieroglyphs,  syllabics, 

determinatives  of  proper  names  and  most  grammatical  endings,  either 
from  want  of  room,  or  because  the  Egyptians  were  so  familiar  with  the 
legends  that  the  merest  suggestion  of  them  was  enough  to  make  them 
plain. 

3.  The  signs  may  be  reversed,  or  placed  sideways,  or  doubled,  to  make  them 

balance  better. 

4.  The   deceased   is   figured    under   various   symbols.      Those   used    on    the 

scarabs  mentioned  in  this  article  are  : 

(i)  I  7iofer,  see  113  and  55.     (See  plates  at  end  of  article.) 

(ii)  '^,  "  revered  per-son,"  128. 

(iii)    ^^,  Horus-bird  with  Ra-sign  and  uraeus  from  the  foot  (often 

omitted),  "glorified  one,"  26,  137. 
(iv)     I  7ieter  (uncommon,  1 38). 

(v)  J  hes,  139. 

(vi)  0    I  variant,  hes,  87. 

All    these   symbols  are  found    on    other  antiquities;  T  in   the  Abbott 

Papyrus  in  combination  with  ^ ;     v\    on  the  marble  amulet  at  Leiden 

Jin     ^_B?^ 

Museum  ;     |  in  the   Ani  Papyrus ;  0  on  the  Ptolemaic  sarcophagus  of 

Pa-nehem-Isis. 
,»  (vii)  ^,   ^,  in  its  two  forms,  amakit,  94  and  96,  is  generally,  not 

always,  used  of  a  deceased  person. 
"  Hypotheses  are  nets  ;  only  he  who  throws  them  will  catch  anything." 

In  enumerating  the  contents  of  a  whole  collection  of  a  hundred  or  more 
scarabs,  several  will  be  found  uninteresting  and  unimportant;  a  few  illegible; 
some  incomprehensible,  even  if  their  signs  can  be  read.  They  are  often  beautifully 
cut  with  meanders,  scrolls,  volutes  and  other  spirals  of  different  kinds,  all  of  which 
doubtless  had  originally  a  symbolic  meaning,  now  lost. 


Tlie  Grenfell  Collection  Oj    Scarabs.  23 

There  seems  some  evidence  to  prove  that  the  double  spiral  (ill)  and  the 
single  spiral  signify  "  life."  In  an  article  on  the  Scarabs  of  Queen's  College, 
Oxford,  in  the  Journal  of  Egyptian  ArcJiaeology  for  October,  1915,  I  figured  nine 
double  spiral  scajabs,  20-28.  I  then  thought  the  double  spiral  was  an  amulet, 
since  it  is  so  frequently  used — as  other  spirals  are  not — with  the  symbols  for  the 
dead.  But  on  Scarab  1 1 1,  Fitzwilliam  Museum,  "■  Ra,  the  goldett  One,  Lord  of  Life" 
and    on    112,    Mond   Collection,   the    double   and    the    single    spiral    seem    to    be 

substituted  for  ■¥■  and  to  interchange  with  it.  So  it  is  possible  that  these  spirals 
mean  "life."  We  also  find  the  substitution  on  Scarab  113,  being  the  same  in 
meaning  as  the  original  and  much  commoner  design  1 14,  both  in  the  Blanchard 
Collection,  "  May  Isis  {give)  a  good  life." 

On  112  the  spiral  ends  in  a  lotus  bud,  the  well-known  symbol  for  the 
"  New  Life." 

On  1 1 3  the  two  spirals  have  a  lotus  flower  between  them,  with  the  same 
signification.  See  also  28,  which  may  mean  "  Establish  {his,  deceased's)  life." 
The  double  spiral  appears  on  the  skirt  of  a  Hittite  Amazon,  see  P.S.B.A., 
Vol.  XXXII,  1910. 

That  the  fish  means  Isis  there  is  ample  evidence.  We  find  Isis  as  a  fish 
associated  on  scarabs  with  Bast,  Neith  and  Serq,  as  we  should  expect.  With  Serq 
as  a  scorpion  she  is  found  on  a  scarab  (i  15)  in  the  British  Museum,  "  May  Isis  and 
Serq  ivatch  over  and  love  the  lion  of  Thebes"  =  the  king. 

The  remarkable  bronze  fish  on  a  sledge  now  at  Cairo  Museum,  116  {Cemeteries 
of  Abydos,  II,  xxxix),  is  a  symbol  of  Isis,  having  the  horns,  disk  and  uraeus  as 
worn  by  her.  Berlin  Museum  has  a  similar  fish.  Compare  this  fish  with  the  head 
of  a  figurine  of  Isis  (117)  belonging  to  Mr.  Blanchard.  But  most  remarkable  of 
all  is  the  decoration  on  an  anthropoid  coffin  of  Roman  date  (118),  found  by 
M.  Smolenski  at  Gamhoud,  and  published  by  Ahmet  Bey  Kamal  in  the  Annates 
du  Service  des  Antiqnites  de  I' Egypte,  IX,  1908.  It  represents  a  mummy  laid  out 
on  a  bier  and  an  oxyrhynchus  fish  hovering  over  it,  replacing  the  usual  Ba-bird. 
I  am  not  aware  of  the  fish  ever  symbolising  the  soul.  This  fish  is  probably  Isis. 
Her  worship  was  spread  over  the  civilised  world  at  the  date  of  this  cofiin. 

The  fish  was  the  earliest  symbol  used  for  Christ.  There  seems  to  have  been 
a  mingling  of  pagan  and  Christian  .symbols  at  first,  and  no  reluctance  was  shown  to 
use  a  pagan  setting.  Christ  is  called  "  The  scarabaeus  of  God."  There  were  also 
Christian  mummies. 

The  fish  sometimes  is  an  emblem  of  fertility. 

The  feathering  of  the  legs  of  the  beetle,  10  (photograph),  is  not  later  than  the 
Xlllth  dynasty.  11  to  15  are  of  the  XVth  dynasty.  The  Hyksos  formula 
Ra-n-Ra,  " Ra  proceeding  from  Ra"  is  .shown  on  13,  14,  15.  This  formula  is 
repeated  occasionally  on  scarabs  of  a  later  date,  see  33  and  46,  of  the  XlXth 
dynasty.  There  is  an  almost  similar  scarab  to  46  in  the  Bootle  Museum,  and  also 
one  in  the  Athens  Museum,  but  these  two  latter  have  not  got  the  curious  object 
seen  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  46. 

Of  royal  scarabs  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  16  is  Aahmes  I,  first  king  of  that 
dynasty,  "Neb-pehti-Ra,  ruler  of  Egypt";  17  is  "  The  Royal  Wife  Nefertari"  his 
queen.     Her  scarabs  are  common. 

18  is  Thothmes  I  (?)  as  a  lion  over  a  captive. 

19,  20,  21,  22  are  some  of  the  common  Men-kheper-Ra  (Thothmes  III) 
scarabs,  the  largest  class  of  all,  and  the  most  uninteresting. 

B  4 


24  The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs. 

23  is  Amenhetep  II,  Aa-kheperu-Ra. 

24  and  25  may  be  called  "circling  scarabs."  Both  are  rather  faulty  specimens. 
The  design  is  more  carefully  given  on  1 19  (at  Alnwick  Castle)  "  Z^/ //o/  the  heart 
{of  deceased)  be  destroyed  by  the  judge,  but  may  he  circle  round  t/u  temple  of  Amen 
Ra."  The  heart  was  considered  the  part  of  a  man  which  sinned,  therefore 
judgment  was  passed  on  it.  The  hieroglyph  for  "judge"  is  \^,  ap,  the  two  horns, 
used  here  with  the  determinative  of  a  seated  figure.  Thoth  is  called  ap  rehui, 
\J  <=>  I  ^^\  "  the  judge  of  the  Rehui  "  ( Horus  and  Set).  ^^  hetem, "  to  destroy," 
is  an  uncommon  hieroglyph  of  a  bird  with  a  drooping  head  and  a  very  long  neck. 
It  is  not  given  in  the  sign-lists  of  the  Grammars  of  Erman,  Brugsch  and  Farina, 
but  it  is  given  in  those  of  Loret  and  Budge.  The  latter  part  of  24  and  25  is  clear 
enough.  Dr.  Budge  in  The  Liturgy  of  Funerary  Offerings,  1909,  writes:  "It  is 
known  from  many  texts  that  souls  (kau)  journeyed  from  one  great  sanctuary  to 
another  in  Egypt,  and  that  they  assisted  at  all  the  great  national  festivals,  and 
expected  to  receive  their  due  share  of  the  offerings  which  were  brought  to 
the  altars." 

A  second  variety  of  circling  scarabs  is  120  in  the  Blanchard  Collection,  which 
figures  the  ka  as  well  as  the  ab  "  circling  round." 

The  MacGregor  Collection  has  a  third  variety,  121,  "  Itt  his  worship  may  he 
circle  round  the  roads  of  Bubastis."  [The  ape  is  a  symbol  of  worship.]  There  is 
yet  a  fourth  kind  of  circling  scarab,   122  (British  Museum),  which  has  the  word 

^  ,  kedi,  "  go  round  in  a  circle,"  with  the  two  legs  for  a  determinative.  "  May 
Amen  Ra  the  lord,  king  of  the  gods,  arrive,  and  circle  round  {the  heavens)  and  make 
the  breath  {of  life)  for  those  above  {the  earth)."  Circling  scarabs  are  all  rare 
except  the  first  variety. 

26  is  a  plaque  of  Serq  with  the  determinative  of  a  goddess.  Apparently  she 
is  protecting  a  Glorified  One,  though  the  Ra-sign  and  the  uraeus  from  the  bird's 
foot  do  not  appear.  But  so  much  is  not  written  out  on  scarabs,  which  was  too 
familiar  to  the  Egyptians  to  need  repetition,  that  it  makes  many  puzzles  for  us 
who  are  not  so  well  equipped.  The  reverse  of  this  plaque  has  two  scorpions. 
Serq  is  frequently  doubled,  probably  to  fill  up  the  space.  On  Scarab  123  (Liver- 
pool Museum)  she  is  guarding  the  king,  figured  as  a  lion.  On  124  (Eton  College) 
she  is  found  with  Isis  figured  as  a  fish.  I  have  already  alluded  to  Serq's 
appearance  on  Scarab  1 15. 

29  is  the  usual  pattern  having  its  origin  in  the  head  of  Hat-hor,  which  is 
common  on  scarabs. 

XlXth  dynasty.  36,  the  king  offering  to  Ptah  in  a  shrine,  and  37,  the  king 
adoring  Amen  who  is  under  the  form  of  an  obelisk,  are  adoration  scarabs,  of  which 
there  are  a  large  number.  Above  the  obelisk  on  37  is  written  one  of  the  ancient 
titles  of  the  Almighty  (plural  omitted)  "  Lord  of  Lords,"  repeated  even  now  by 
millions  of  persons  week  after  week  in  the  Anglican  prayer  for  the  reigning 
Sovereign.  Several  such  Egyptian  expressions,  incorporated  into  the  Bible, 
masquerade  as  belonging  to  Hebrew  literature  when  they  do  not,  but  are  merely 
copied  into  it.  On  the  hypocephalus  amulet  of  a  lady,  Ta-tu,  we  find  :  ''  O  Amen 
of  A  mens  who  art  in  heaven  above  (compare  the  beginning  of  the  Lord's  Prayer) 

turn  thy  face  tozvards  the  body  of  thy  daughter,  tlie  august  Osiris, 

who  is  in  the  funeral  region,  Ta-tu,  deceased."  On  the  base  of  the  great  Karnak 
obelisk,  Queen  Hatshepsut  calls  herself  "  the  form  of  forms." 


The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs.  25 

38  is  the  king  (or  Amen)  as  a  sphinx,  guarding  0  lies  (deceased)  [ruHng]  over 

North  and  South  Egypt,  which  country  is  symboHsed  by  a  lotus  and  a  papyrus 
plant. 

40  is  "  May  fikih.  Lord  of  the  beautiful  fcue,  give  strength "  ^ ,  her, 

is  used  here  in  its  original  meaning  of  "  face,"  though  it  is  more  common  as 
a   preposition.      On  a   plaque  in  the   British   Museum  (125)   we   read:   " Ptah  of 

beautiful  face."     §  or    ^    sometimes  means  the  god   Hor,   or   Horus,   as  in    136. 

It  is  a  very  common  ingredient  in  private  names,  as  Hor-du,  Hor-y,  Hor-men,  etc. 

41,  "  Ra  the  only  strength,"  is  a  boat  scarab.  Several  of  these  are  common, 
and  form  a  large  class  of  thirty  or  more  varieties. 

42,  "  Ra  stands  firm  ;  Do  not  fear." 

43,  44,  45,  are  scarabs  representing  Thoth  as  a  cynocephalous  ape.     On  43  he 

is  in  company  with  Khonsu  guarding  0 .     On  44  and  45  he  is  "  Lord  of  Maat," 

that  is  of  the  life  of  the  Au-dela,  which  by  his  magic  words,  ceremonies,  etc., 
he  brings  about  for  the  deceased. 

XXVth  dynasty.  79,  both  in  photographs  and  drawings,  has  Thoth  as  an 
ibis.  This  ibis  resembles  the  gnostic  form  of  Thoth  figured  with  the  caduceus  of 
Hermes,  126  (Biella  Museum). 

48  is  an  interesting  "Fluttering  Power"  scarab;  "May  Ra  {give)  □  ^J^  ^^t^^ 

(man)  the  fluttering  power,  to  wander  unceasingly  over  his  domain  iti  the  riext  world," 
as  described  in  the  inscription  on  the  stele  of  Nekht-Amsu,  or  Nekht-Min,  see 
Dr.  Budge's  Egyptian  Reading-Book,  1906.  A  most  remarkable  and  unique  scarab, 
published  by  Prof  Newberry  on  PI.  XL,  31,  in  Scarabs,  1909,  has  this  inscription, 
slightly  shortened,  on  it.  I  have  noticed  this  scarab  in  an  article  in  the  Reateil, 
Vol.  XXX,  1908,  "  Amuletic  Scarabs  for  the  Deceased,"  and  figured  it  with  five 
other  rare  fluttering  power  scarabs.     One  of  the  commoner  varieties  is  izj,"  May 

Horus  {give)  him  the  fluttering  power  like "  word  omitted. 

Prof  Sethe  has  given  the  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the  high  white  crown  Q,  hez, 
of  Upper  Egypt  on  some  of  these  scarabs  in  the  Report  on  Some  Excavations  in  the 
Tlieban  Necropolis,  1908,  in  the  chapter  supplied  by  him  "  Die  aenigmatischen 
Inschriften."     In  this  report  the  text  of  a  Hymn  to  Amen  is  published,  written  in 

this  enigmatic  script,  where  Q  is  given  as  the  equivalent  of  1  y>'  absolute 
pronoun,  3rd  pers.  sing.,  "  he  "  or  "  him."  As  Osiris  nearly  always  wears  this  crown, 
and  the  beatified  deceased  became  an  Osiris  at  death,  it  seems  a  very  suitable 
hieroglyph  to  choose  for  him. 

On  a  scarab  (128)  in  the  John  Ward  Collection,  instead  of  (),  the  deceased 
is  figured  as  a  revered  person  seated. 

A  fourth  variety  (Louvre  Museum)  is   129,  "May  there  be  {for  deceased)  the 

fluttering  power  like  ..-...."     The  word  after  j)  is  elided  in  these  last  three 

examples, ^ee  the  remarks  in  Brugsch's  Grammar,  p.  105,  under  Q  U  :    "  After  this 

word  the  elision  of  a  noun  is  a  general  rule  in  all  phrases  of  reciprocal  comparison." 
Therefore  we  must  supply  a  noun,  and  here  it  is  "  gods,"  "  may  there  be  the  fltUtering 
power  {for  deceased)  like  the  gods." 

In  fact,  there  is  a  "  key  "  scarab  (i  30)  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Eraser  Collection, 
1900,  slightly  broken,  but  not  enough  to  make  the  design  illegible,  which,  fully 
written  out,  runs  :  "  May  he  be  provided  with  the  fluttering  power  like  the  gods." 


26  The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs. 

A  scarab  (131)  in  the  Mond  Collection  has  the  hez  sign  used  in  the  same  way : 
"  May  he  {deceased^  see  Ra."  The  same  signs  arranged  differently  are  found  on 
a  scarab,  132  (drawing),  formerly  in  the  Meux  Collection.  To" see  J? a"  was  one 
of  the  rewards  of  the  righteous,  and  as  man's  psychic  nature  remains  the  same 
through  the  ages,  Tennyson,  in  his  last  poem,  "  Crossing  the  Bar,"  has  the 
same  wish. 

The  Grenfell  Collection  includes  three  Ta-urt,  orThoueris  scarabs,  49,  63,  64 — 
the  two  latter  XXVth  dynasty— and  a  Thoueris  plaque,  93,  XXVIth  dynasty. 
The  fourth  Thoueris  scarab,  1 33  and  49  (copied  among  the  scarabs  drawn,  as  it  is 

so  indistinct),  shows  a  lotus  symbolic  of  onkh,  instead  of  the  more  usual  V  ■¥• , 

sa  onkh,  "fluid  of  life"  so  frequently  prayed  for  on  scarabs  by  deceased.  Thoueris 
has  a  knife  in  her  hand  on  63,  64,  and  on  133,  to  cut  down  the  enemies  of  the 
deceased.  On  a  beautifully  incised  scarab  in  Queen's  College,  Oxford,  she  has 
a  second  knife  tied  on  to  her  foot. 

The  lotus   used   for  •¥"  also   appears   on   scarab    134  in  Stuttgart  Museum, 

"  May  there  be  {for  deceased)  life  with  Thoth  /  "  A  verb  is  suppressed  on  Scarab  135, 
"  May  Thoth  {give)  life  with  Ra  !  "  The  verb  is  given  on  1 36,  "  May  Horns  give 
him  life"  (Grant  Bey  Collection). 

54  is  a  chariot  scarab.     The  horse  is  better  shaped  than  usual. 

55  is  a  nofer  protected  by  six  concentric  amuletic  rings.  56  is  of  the  Apis 
signs  type  of  scarab,  though  it  is  a  contracted  example  not  giving  all  the  signs. 
Vienna  Museum  and  Queen's  College,  Oxford,  have  the  perfect  set,  namely,, 
a  winged  disk,  a  hawk  with  outspread  wings,  and  a  beetle  with  expanded  wings,. 
here  evidently  referring  to  the  flight  of  the  soul  after  death. 

59  is  a  " transformation "  scarab,  " May  there  be  transformations  {for  deceased)" 

M.  Naville  mentions  the  m  ^^  :  1  transformations,  in  La  Litanie  du  Soleil.  An 
analogous  scarab  (137)  in  the  Hood  Collection  has  "May  the  glorified  {have)  trans- 
^orinations."     Liverpool    Museum    has   a   scarab,    138   (drawing),   "  May  Ra  give 

deceased  transformations."  It  has  the  rare  expression  for  deceased,  |,  found  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani,  and  on  a  few  other  scarabs.  The  British  Museum  has  a  plaque 
(139),   "May  some  goddess {?)  give   transformations   to   deceased!'     The   latter   is 

figured  under  the  0  sign.     The  two  dots  represent  the  plural,  usually  suppressed. 

The  middle  dot  is  omitted  as  it  would  interfere  with  the  A  sign  ;  and  an  absolute 

rule  on  scarabs  is  that  no  sign  should  ever  touch  another  sign.  This  makes  for 
clearness  very  decidedly.  Of  course  there  are  a  few  composite  signs  to  which  this 
rule  does  not  apply,  but  they  arc  rare. 

60  has  a  tied  lotus:  an  unexplained  amulet (?). 

65,  XXVth  dynasty,  has  a  Bennu-bird,  flanked  by  two  uraei.  The  remarkable 
point  is  that  the  uraei  are  not  heraldically  placed  as  usual.  This  peculiarity  also 
occurs  on  a  scarab  (140)  formerly  in  the  Hilton  Price  Collection,  where  the  name 
"  Unn "  is  written.  Whether  65  is  a  name  "  Bennu,"  I  couki  not  sa\-.  The 
Egyptians  frequently  gave  theophorous  names  to  their  children,  but  I  have  not 
come  across  Bennu  as  a  personal  name. 

68  (plaque)  and  69  (scarab)  have  the  usual  arrangement  of  Bes  worshipped 
by  apes.     70  has  Bes  grasping  serpents,  also  a  well-known  design. 

71  shows  a  man  holding  out  two  goats. 

75  has  "  May  Bast  give  good  things" 


The  Grenfell  Colleciioft  of  Scarabs. 


27 


f 


'  •  ■  ■ 


16  ..«^17 


18 


23 


•' 


24  xs>.25  ^^^  !26         >^27 


•' 


28 


29 

t 


f 


32 


33         ^^i5t.34 


.     -    \iH/ 


^, 


^^^38 


39 


41 


^ 


49 


if 


43  ^^47         ^^  48 

46 


? 


•' 


i°  0  • 


52 


28  The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs. 

The  Grenfell  Collection  has  a  few  private  persons'  names,  besides  the  possible 
one,  65.  81  is  a  private  name,  Sebek-sa.  Lieblein  gives  an  example  from  a  stele 
at  Vienna. 

84  is  the  well-known  scarab  of  "  Prince  Pa-ma  {the  lion),  hereditary  mayor, 
priest  of  Osiris,  lord  of  Dedu!' 

89  is  the  scarab  of  a  1    ^     ''  suten-rekh,  royal  relative,  Pa-fet-pet,  deceased" 

Lieblein  gives  a  somewhat  similar  name,  P-f-pet-neter-ra,  on  a  statuette  in  the 
Hermitage,  Petrograd. 

94 :  "The  deceased  amakh,  Nef"  J|,  with  the  determinative  of  a  woman, 

occurs  on  a  stele  in  the  Florence  Museum. 

The  Grenfell  Collection  also  has  a  plaque  (141)  with  the  name  Unnef  on  it. 

In  the  Boston  Fine  Art  Institute,  U.S.A.,  we  get  the  full  name  T  ^^,  Unnofer,  142. 

So  there  were  three  contractions  of  this  favourite  name  of  Unnofer  ;  namely, 
Unn  140,  Nef  94,  and  Unnef  141.  In  its  Greek  form  of  Onnophris,  'OiM-w^pic.  it 
was  a  common  Egyptian  name  in  the  Graeco-Roman  period.  There  is  a  church 
in  Rome  dedicated  to  Sant'  Onofrio. 

91,  a  lion  with  Ra-sign  above,  is  a  title  placed  above  the  name  of  the  king,  and 
used  in  the  XXVth  and  XXVIth  dynasties.  There  is  a  lion  on  a  scarab  of  Shabaka, 
143,  and  on  one  of  Taharqa,  144,  both  in  the  Cairo  Museum  ;  also  one  on  a  scarab 
of  Psamtek  I,  published  in  Petrie's  History  of  Egypt.  92  also  has  this  lion  and  the 
hieroglyph  khent  (literally  "in  front  of"),  here  with  the  meaning  of  ruling  over 
(Egypt).  95  is  also  a  title  "  The  Great  One  of  Five,"  signifying  the  High  Priest  of 
Hermopolis.     Scarabs  with  titles  only  on  them,  without  names  or  other  signs,  are 

rare.     The   Fitzwilliam    Museum    has    one,  1    ^   ;    the    Bower    Collection   has 

^v     ^   ;  the  Wiedemann  Collection  has    J  | . 

97  may  be  a  modern  cutting,  "Amen  Ra  the  Lord"  on  a  XIIth(?)  dynasty 
scarab. 

99  and  also  78  are  conical  seals,  exceedingly  rough  and  primitive  in  design ; 
99  has  a  divinity  on  the  back  of  a  quadruped  with  a  worshipper. 

100  and  loi  seem  allied  to  each  other.  The  object  between  the  two  men  on 
102  is  apparently  an  upright  lotus.  Dorow  and  Klaproth  in  Antiqiiites  Egyptiennes, 
No.  1389,  figure  similar  deities  (?),  with  the  same  object  (?)  between  them  (146). 

102  is  possibly  a  temple,  but  not  of  Egyptian  style. 

Alice  Grenfell. 


A  few  notes  may  be  added  on  the  dates  of  these  scarabs,  i  has  the  two  nefer 
signs  for  Ra,  often  found  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  ;  it  reads  thus  Ra-kheper-ka-kho, 
apparently  a  double  reading  of  Senusert  1 1  with  the  ha  added  of  Senusert  I.  2  to  4 
are  also  of  the  Xllth  dynasty.  5  is  probably  of  the  Hyksos  age,  and  11  is  of  the 
style  of  Apepa  II.  21  has  the  title  Mery-ra.  22  is  very  unusual ;  Tahutmes  has 
the  title  em  so  milot,  "  with  the  sceptre  of  right,"  probably  a  reflection  on  Hotshepsut. 
The  reverse  is  "  beloved  of  Sebek,  lord  of  Sun,"  an  inscription  common  enough  in 
the  XI  Ith  dynasty,  but  unusual  later.  23  has  the  crowned  uraei  of  South  and  North, 
which  are  unusual  at  so  early  a  date.  The  plant  on  28  should  be  compared  with 
113.     32  is  a  scarab  of  Tahutmes  III,  made  by  Sety  I.     35  to  38  are  probably  of 


The  GrenfelL  Collection  of  Scarabs. 


29 


I   •    • 


•    # 


80  X^2S81 


83 


1"  •"  f 


•  e 


87  88  ^^^69 


84 


• 


90 


91 


92  OT  «^  ,^fc.96 

-^^^        94        95  ^^ 


• 


97 


98 


99        ^^^  100         -    im  _  102 


1/1 -A 


.^v 


30  The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs. 

Ramessu  II.  53  is  of  Ramessu  III ;  and  54  is  probably  of  the  same  by  the  indot 
before  the  king.    68,  69  are  of  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty,  and  71   of  the  XXVth. 

87  by  the  sphinx  holding  a  hes  vase  is  of  Men-kheper-ra  of  the  XXVth  ;  as  also  are 

88  and  89,  the  latter  having  the  name  on  the  other  side.  90  is  of  Menkara,  vassal 
of  Shabaka.  On  91,  92,  144,  the  Ra  and  Lion  are  of  Psamthek,  as  a  vas.sal  of 
Taharqa.  100,  lOi,  146  appear  to  be  all  alliance  scarabs  ;  on  loi  and  146  the  two 
figures  are  swearing  alliance  over  an  altar,  with  the  sun  as  witness  above.  So  far 
as  the  detail  can  be  estimated  in  the  drawing  it  looks  as  if  one  figure  wore  the 
Hittite  tall  cap,  and  the  other  the  Egyptian  double  crown.  n6,  the  disc  and  horns 
are  the  usual  headdress  of  the  sacred  O.xyrhynkhos  ;  of  the  dozen  goddesses  with 
this  headdress,  Hathor  seems  to  be  the  one  in  question,  see  figure  from  Great  Oasis, 
Wilkinson,  J/,  and  C,  Fig.  584.  141  is  one  of  the  foundation  deposits  of  the  High- 
priest  Nebunnef  from  Qurneh  (see  Qurneh,  xxxiii,  Memphis  II,  xxvi,  4),  under 
Ramessu  II.  The  readings  which  are  of  various  degrees  of  probability,  suggested 
by  Mrs.  Grenfell,  were  noticed  in  the  last  number  of  this  Journal,  p.  185,  and  will 
have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  any  future  study  of  such  scarabs. 


ii 


W.  M.  F.  P. 


i 


The  Grenfell  Collection  of  Scarabs. 


31 


119 


(      32      ) 


THE   END   OF  THE   HITTITES. 

After  the  close  of  the  Egyptian  contact  with  the  Kheta  in  1194  B.C.  under 
Ramessu  III,  we  gain  no  further  literary  evidence  on  the  Egyptian  side.  In  the 
Book  of  Kings  there  are  references  to  Hittites  under  David  and  Solomon,  and  the 
last  living  allusion  seems  to  be  under  Jehoram,  when  the  Syrians  besieging  Samaria, 
about  892  B.C.,  supposed  that  the  Hittites  and  Egyptians  were  coming  to  attack 
them.  The  mention  of  Hittites  in  Ezra  is  an  archaistic  recital  of  the  heathens  of 
Palestine  (ix,  i),  and  in  Nehemiah  (ix,  8),  only  an  historical  allusion  to  the  past. 
Thus  from  literary  sources  we  lose  sight  of  the  Hittites  in  Syria  about  900  B.C. 
This  is  about  the  middle  of  the  earlier  Iron  Age  of  the  Hittites,  see  ANCIENT  Egypt, 

1914.  P-  173- 

At  about  this  point  we  find  them  in  Western  literature  in  the  Odyssey.  This 
was  recognised  some  forty  years  ago  by  the  late  Basil  Cooper,  as  stated  in  an 
unpublished  paper  of  his,  which  his  daughter,  Miss  Cooper,  has  kindly  placed  in  my 
hands  with  his  books.  In  the  discourse  of  Odysseus  with  Alkinous  {Od.,  XI,  521), 
he  says:  "But  [I  will  relate]  how  he  (Neoptolemos)  slew  the  hero  Eurypylos  son 
of  Telephos  with  the  bronze  (sword),  and  many  Ketean  companions  were  slain 
around  him."  The  scholiast  states  that  the  Keteans  were  a  people  of  Mysia.  No 
trace  of  such  a  name  of  people  is  otherwise  found  in  Mysia  and  Western  Asia 
Minor.  As  the  leader  was  son  of  Alkinous  it  is  unlikely  that  he  would  draw  on 
a  race  far  east  of  Troy  for  his  companions.  Probably  we  should  see  in  these 
a  mercenary  troop  of  Khita  soldiers.  Strabo  could  not  clear  up  the  passage 
(XIII,  i,  69),  but  he  asserts  (70)  that  there  is  a  small  torrent  which  joins  an  affluent 
of  the  Kaikos,  named  Ketaion.  He  refers  again  to  these  Keteans  in  XIII,  iii,  2, 
XIV,  v,  23,  28,  without  any  further  information.  Perhaps  this  outpost  of  Khita 
gave  their  name  to  the  torrent  which  flowed  from  their  stronghold  in  the  mountains. 


The  South-west  Coast  of  Cilicia,  according  to  Ptolemy's  Geography. 


Later  we  touch  a  much  more  definite  location  of  Keteans  in  the  first  century  A.D., 
when  Ptolemy  describes  a  district  of  Kilikia  called  Ketis.  In  the  accompanying 
map  the  positions  of  districts  and  cities  are  shown  as  Ptolemy  describes  them. 


The  End  of  the  Hittites. 


33 


Evidently  he  did  not  know  of  the  northward  trend  of  the  coast  into  the  gulf  of  the 
Kydnos.  Otherwise  the  formation  agrees  closely  with  the  truth  ;  the  diagonal  trend 
of  the  river  Kalykadnos,  and  the  mountain  ranges,  rule  the  divisions  of  the 
country.  The  ej^tent  of  the  districts  is  shown  by  the  positions  of  cities  named  in 
the  districts.  The  names  of  these  districts  are  written  here  parallel  to  the  rivers, 
and  the  other  divisions  shown  by  broken  lines  ;  the  names  of  the  cities  are  at  right 
angles.  PVom  Domitianopolis  being  in  Dalasis,  Ketis  cannot  extend  more  to  the 
north-east ;  and  from  Kaystros  being  in  Selenis,  it  could  not  be  further  south-west. 
Thus  Ketis  is  limited  to  a  strip  along  the  coast  from  Seleukia  westward  to  the 
valley  of  the  Arymagdos,  a  region  of  about  eighty  miles  of  coast  and  twenty  miles 
inland,  exactly  opposite  the  nearest  coast  of  Cyprus.  As  we  know  that  the  Hittite 
power  formerly  covered  this  region,  there  seems  no  reason  to  question  the  continuance 
of  the  name  here  down  to  Roman  times.  Whether  we  may  also  see  in  Kition,  on 
the  opposite  shores  of  Cyprus,  another  vestige  of  Hittite  influence  is  doubtful,  as 
they  do  not  seem  to  have  had  any  sea  power. 


W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


(     34    ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Annales  dn  Service  des  Antiqiiites  de  f  £,gypt.     Tome  XIV. 

Cairo,  19 14. 

DUCROS,  HiPPOLYTE  A. — L'Arbre  Ash  des  Aticiens  Agyptiens.  It  is  shown 
that  names  alone  are  not  conclusive  as  to  plants  ;  various  modern  Egyptian  words 
are  applied  to  two  different  plants,  and  names  are  misunderstood.  The  names 
that  are  known  will  not  at  all  cover  all  the  varieties  of  wood  that  are  actually  found 
wrought.  A  surprising  result  of  the  examination  of  ancient  wood,  is  that  yew  was 
commonly  known  to  the  Egyptians,  and  used  for  coffins  ;  unfortunately  no  dates 
are  given  by  which  the  period  of  this  extent  of  trade  could  be  estimated. 

Asli  was  usually  considered  to  be  cedar ;  but  on  the  strength  of  the  deter- 
minative in  one  case  being  a  long  pod  of  seeds,  M.  Loret  claimed  that  it  was  the 
Acacia  seyal.  This  M.  Ducros  rebuts  by  showing  that  there  are  eight  different 
formsof  determinative,  only  one  of  which  is  the  pod.  These  are  probably  corruptions 
of  one  form  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  that  of  a  rough  log  of  timber. 
M.  Ducros  then  takes  as  a  determining  description  that  the  heart  of  Bata  was 
placed  on  the  top  of  the  flower  of  the  ash  tree.  The  small  red  capsule  of  the  yew, 
and  the  berry  in  it,  is  quoted  as  likely  to  be  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  the  heart  of 
Bata.  Such  is  M.  Ducros'  conclusion.  The  idea,  however,  is  not  that  the  heart  of 
Bata  became  the  flower  of  the  ash,  but  that  it  was  placed  upon  it.  When  we  look 
to  more  practical  evidence  it  seems  impossible  for  the  ash  to  have  been  the  yew. 
It  was  the  usual  wood  for  the  best  shipbuilding,  and  in  the  time  of  Sneferu  a  ship 
of  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet  long  was  built  of  ash  wood ;  it  seems  impossible  to 
suppose  a  ship  of  this  size  being  built  of  such  slender  wood  as  the  yew.  That 
it  came  from  Syria  is  certain,  as  ash  from  the  mountains  of  Retennu  is  mentioned 
on  the  stele  of  Amenhetep  III  {^Six  Temples,  1.  17).  That  the  wood  produced 
an  oil  is  certain,  as  ash  is  one  of  the  seven  sacred  oils.  We  require  to  find  then 
a  tree  of  large  growth,  fairly  abundant,  producing  an  oil,  and  growing  in  Syria. 
The  cedar  seems  to  fit  all  these  requirements ;  the  cypress  or  pine  might  be 
possible,  but  the  acacia  or  yew  cannot  be  accepted.  The  early  form  of  the 
determinative  (Palermo  Stone)  is  a  log  with  short  side  twigs,  the  same  as  used  for 
mer  wood. 

Legrain,  Georges. — Au  Pylone  d'Harmhabi  a  Karnak.  The  clearing  up 
of  Karnak  has  reached  the  well-known  Pylon  X,  the  history  of  which  has  been 
fairly  worked  out.  By  the  great  colossus  of  Amenhetep  III  being  placed  on  the 
south  face,  it  seems  that  the  foundation  of  it  must  be  due  to  him.  That  the 
colossus  was  put  in  place  before  the  pylon  was  built  is  likely  enough.  From  the 
Ramesside  description  we  know  that  a  long  earth  slope  was  required  to  raise 
a  colossus,  and  then  it  was  tilted  upright  over  the  end.  In  doing  this  a  pylon 
would  be  an  extreme  encumbrance  on  the  ground  ;  so  we  may  take  it  as  a  rule 
that  colossal  figures  had  to  be  put  in  place  before  building  a  pylon  behind  them. 
The  building  on  the  foundation  was  of  course  suspended  by  Akhenaten  ;  but  it 


i 


Annales  da   Service.  35 

was  resumed  by  Tutonkhamen  or  Ay,  who  used  up  the  buildings  of  Akhenaten  for 
material.  After  that  it  was  carved  by  Heremheb.  The  fellow  statue  to  the 
■colossus  only  has  cartouches  by  Heremheb,  but  it  may  have  been  made  by  Amen- 
hetep  III.  On  Jhe  north  face  are  two  statues  ;  on  the  base  of  one  is  the  effaced 
name  of  Queen  ^ezem-mut,  so  these  are  due  to  Heremheb.  The  figures,  however, 
are  of  Ramessu  H. 

On  the  inside  of  the  gateway  is  an  inscription  about  making  monuments,  due 
probably  to  Heremheb ;  the  cartouche  has  been  usurped  by  Psamthek.  The 
lower  part  of  a  reconstruction  of  the  pylon  entrance  in  sandstone  has  been  found 
on  the  south  side.  The  inscription  on  this  new  portal  states  that  it  was  erected 
under  Padabastet  (826-786  B.C.)  by  the  governor  Pashedbastet,  son  of  Sheshenq  H 
(born  about  854  B.C.).  He  states  that  "  he  made  a  great  gate  of  sandstone  after 
he  found  it  going  "(to  ruin),  or  "far  from"  (completion).  This  implies  that  the 
pylon  had  begun  to  fall  to  pieces  before  800  B.C.  This  is  strangely  connected  by 
M.  Legrain  with  "  ce  raid  de  Carthaginois  qu'  Ammien  Marcellin  (XVII,  4) 
reporte  aux  debuts  du  regne  de  Padoubastit."  Now  Carthage  was  only  founded 
about  a  generation  before  this  restoration,  and  Ammianus  only  states  that  the 
Carthaginians  once  took  Thebes,  without  a  hint  of  the  date  or  any  allusion  to 
Petubastes.  The  pylon  is  very  unstable  in  construction,  being  merely  a  shell  of 
blocks,  filled  with  loose  stones  which  press  the  walls  out.  The  damage  to  such 
a  building  was  probably  due  to  earthquake,  rather  than  to  a  raid  of  enemies. 

By  far  the  most  important  result  of  the  clearing  was  finding  two  pairs  of 
figures  seated  cross-legged,  of  Amenhetep  son  of  Hapi,  and  of  Paramessu.  It  was 
known  how  in  late  times  Amenhetep  was  worshipped  in  the  temple  of  Deir  el-Bahri, 
but  his  contemporary  figures  here  show  how  his  sacred  position  was  established 
during  his  life.  On  the  base  of  his  figure  is  the  address  :  "  Oh  people  of  Karnak, 
desirous  of  seeing  Amen,  come  to  me,  I  will  make  known  to  him  your  prayers, 
I  am  intercessor  of  this  god ;  Nibmuria  has  placed  me  to  repeat  the  words  of  the 
two  lands ;  make  to  me  the  nesut  da  lietep,  invoke  my  name  continually  as  you  do 
to  a  favoured  one,"  or  "  to  the  dead."  The  other  figure  is  equally  explicit :  "  Oh 
south  and  north,  do  all  who  see  the  Aten,  who  go  up  the  Nile  to  Thebes  to 
beseech  the  Master  of  the  Gods,  come  to  me.  I  will  pass  on  your  words  to  Amen 
of  Karnak  if  you  make  to  me  nesut  da  ketep.  Make  to  me  a  libation  of  what  you 
carry.  Me,  I  am  intercessor  placed  by  the  king  to  hear  your  words  of  prayer,  to 
transmit  on  high  the  needs  of  the  two  lands."  These  are  documents  of  the  greatest 
import  in  the  religious  history,  showing  a  definite  intermediary  between  the 
worshipper  and  the  god,  and  that  this  person  might  be  a  subject  who  was  not  even 
a  priest.  The  statement  of  his  having  been  appointed  by  Amenhetep  III  to  this 
function,  suggests  that  it  was  a  royal  function  deputed  by  the  king  to  his  subject. 
Yet  the  position  of  Amenhetep  was  essentially  civil  rather  than  religious.  He  was 
registrar  and  organiser  of  the  army,  head  of  police,  organiser  of  public  works  and 
chief  architect,  instructor  in  the  temple  of  Amen,  regulating  the  priesthood, 
directing  the  feasts  of  Amen,  and  performing  daily  sacrifice,  though  not  a  priest 
himself.  These  inscriptions,  showing  the  saintly  position  of  Amenhetep,  exactly 
agree  with  the  Manethonic  quotation  by  Josephus  that  "  Amenophis  son  of  Paapis 
was  one  that  seemed  to  partake  of  a  divine  nature,  both  as  to  wisdom,  and  the 
knowledge  of  future  things." 

The  figures  of  Paramessu  are  also  important.  They  were  certainly  made 
under  Heremheb,  as  his  name  is  on  the  breast  and  right  shoulder.  He  was  chief 
■of  archers,  keeper  of  the  cavalry,  keeper  of  the  citadel,  keeper  of  the  mouths  of  the 

C  2 


36  Annates  du   Service. 

Nile,  ambassador,  marshal  of  the  police,  President  of  the  Council,  chief  of  the 
prophets  of  all  the  gods  (ecclesiastical  commissioner),  vizier,  lieutenant  of  the  king 
in  the  south  and  north.  Dux  {repoti)  in  all  the  land.  These  titles  are  parallel  to 
the  important  position  of  Heremheb  before  he  was  king,  and  the  last  title  is  only 
known  otherwise  in  his  case.  If  a  noble  wielded  the  whole  viceregal  power  of  the 
land  thus  under  Heremheb,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would  yield  up  his  power  on  the 
king's  death.  It  seems  then  that  this  Paramessu  dropped  the  article  before  his 
name  and  became  Ramessu  I,  the  founder  of  the  XlXth  dynasty.  Further,  his 
father  was  named  Sety,  and  the  son  of  Ramessu  I  was  named  Sety.  It  seems 
then  that  we  have,  stated  here,  the  rise  to  power  of  the  founder  of  the  XlXth 
dynasty. 

Another  question  is  whether  the  Vizier  Rames,  whose  tomb  is  the  finest  at 
Qurneh,  was  the  same  man  as  the  vizier  of  Heremheb.  Rames  carved  his  chapel 
in  the  early  years  of  Akhenaten,  about  1380  B.C.,  and  appears  to  have  died  then,  as 
the  chapel  was  finished  by  a  relative.  Hence  he  could  not  be  the  later  vizier  who 
succeeded  to  the  throne  in  1328  B.C.  The  reason  assigned  for  the  difference  by 
M.  Legrain,  that  the  father  of  Rames  was  Neby,  and  that  of  Paramessu  was  Sety 
is  not  conclusive,  as  Sety  might  be  politely  called  Nuby  to  avoid  the  unorthodox 
name,  just  as  King  Sety  is  called  Asary  in  his  tomb. 

Ahmed  Bey  KamaL. — Rapport  sur  Us  fouilles  executces  dans  la  zone  comprise 
entre  Detrout  au  Nord  et  Deir  el-Ganadlah,  aii  Stid.  This  account  resumes 
a  previous  notice  of  excavation  at  Meyr.  Each  coffin  found  is  transcribed,  lists 
are  given  of  boats  and  other  funeral  objects,  but  there  is  no  trace  of  the  archaeo- 
logical necessity  of  recording  groups,  there  is  nothing  said  but  what  could  be  seen 
by  looking  at  the  plunder  in  a  museum.  At  Deir  Rifeh  work  was  carried  on 
similarly,  devoid  of  all  archaeological  value ;  the  remark  is  prefixed  "  Mal- 
heureusement,  cette  region, ...  a  ^te  presque  entrement  epuisee."  Happily,  it 
had  been  excavated,  with  a  record  and  publication  of  the  groups  of  objects,  by  the 
British  School  {Gizeh  and  Rifeh),  and  so  there  was  less  left  for  the  senseless 
plundering  carried  on  under  the  Museum  supervision.  A  list  of  fifty-two  objects 
is  given,  worthless  for  archaeological  purposes,  which  have  unhappily  fallen  under 
the  ravages  of  these  excavations.  How  Meyr  has  suffered  under  official  treatment 
has  been  well  stated  by  Mr.  Blackman  {Rock  Tombs  ofMeir,  I,  14-16). 

Mackay,  Ernest. — Report  of  the  Excavations  .  .  .  by  Robert  Mond,  Esq. 
This  paper  gives  a  list  of  thirty-seven  painted  tombs  of  Thebes,  which  have  been 
put  in  safe  condition  by  Mr.  Mackay.  This  most  necessary  work  of  conservation 
and  publication,  which  was  neglected  alike  by  the  Government  and  foreign 
societies,  has  now  happily  been  put  in  good  train  by  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Mond. 
The  abilities  and  zeal  of  Mr.  Mackay  could  not  be  better  used  than  in  the  much- 
needed  work  of  putting  the  cemetery  of  Thebes  into  safe  order,  after  thousands  of 
years  of  ravaging  by  seekers  for  gold  and  for  saleable  antiquities. 

Maspero,  Gaston. — Chansons  Populaires  recueillies  dans  la  Haute-Egypte. 
Two-thirds  of  the  annual  volume  are  occupied  by  this  publication  of  the  store  of 
Arab  songs  collected  in  the  last  fifteen  years,  by  the  care  of  the  Director.  As 
there  is  no  list  of  contents,  or  statement  of  the  arrangement,  we  may  say  that  they 
are  classed  as:  Marriage  Songs  (p.  lOi),  Circumcision  (127),  Funereal  (i30> 
Workers  on  Excavations  (172),  Shaduf  Songs  (185),  Camel-drivers  (211),  Field- 


Annales  dii   Service.  37 

workers  (220),  Ass-drivers  (233),  and  Songs  of  Daily  Life  (245).  Each  song  was 
written  down  in  Arabic  by  a  Syrian  secretary,  and  is  here  given  in  Arab  characters, 
transliterated,  and  translated.  This  incessant  play  of  thought  and  word  around 
the  affairs  of  life  is  entirely  foreign  to  the  modern  westerner ;  it  belongs  to 
a  leisured  sense  of  being,  in  which  mere  sustenance,  and  not  striving,  is  the  frame- 
work of  existence,  and  on  this  there  is  room  for  the  embroidery  of  fancy.  The 
connection  of  thought  in  many  of  the  songs  escapes  us,  they  seem  mere  detached 
phrases,  especiallj'  the  Shaduf  and  Saqieh  songs  ;  sometimes  they  revert  alternately 
to  two  different  themes,  at  other  times  the  thread  escapes  our  materialistic  sense. 
The  leader-and-chorus  songs  are  often  frankly  nonsense  lines,  depending  only  on 
rhyme.  A  good  leader  wil!  improvise  line  after  line  with  reference  to  people  and 
affairs  around,  and  fitting  to  the  uniform  chorus.  This  collection  was  very 
desirable,  though  its  connection  with  antiquities  seems  to  be  mostly  in  the 
collectors  rather  than  the  material. 


Tome    XV,    Fasc.    i,  ii. 

De  Bissing,  Baron  Fr.  W. — Les  Tombeaux  d'Assouan.  Fourteen  pages 
here  add  one  more  to  the  scattered  and  incomplete  accounts  of  this  important 
cemetery.  Descriptions  and  printed  lists  can  never  be  a  substitute  for  clear 
plates  of  the  whole  tomb,  which  are  required  for  all  the  inscribed  tombs  of  the 
country.  The  present  paper  on  the  tombs  of  Mekhu  and  Sabne  is  intended  as  the 
first  of  a  series  ;  let  us  hope  that,  if  the  present  troubles  permit  its  completion, 
continuous  facsimile  plates  will  be  used  for  the  rest. 

Cledat,  JE-^n. — Fouilles  a  Cheikh  Zouede.  Along  the  coast  road  from  Egypt 
to  Syria  a  series  of  forts  were  built  during  the  great  settlement  of  the  Roman 
Empire  under  Trajan  and  Hadrian.  The  coins  found  in  these  posts  range  from 
Antoninus  to  Constantine  II  ;  apparently  the  protection  was  abandoned  by  the 
middle  of  the  fourth  century,  perhaps  in  favour  of  paying  Arab  tribes  blackmail  as 
auxiliaries.  These  forts  were  all  built  on  sand  dunes,  so  that  each  was  within 
sight  of  those  adjacent.  Such  a  position  shows  that  the  place  of  the  dunes  is 
permanent ;  for  had  they  shifted  appreciably,  the  forts  would  have  been  destroyed 
in  the  course  of  fifteen  centuries.  The  tomb  of  a  Muslim  saint,  Sheykh  Zoweydeh, 
gives  its  name  to  a  district,  and  to  the  Roman  fort  near  it.  The  position  is  not 
exactly  stated,  but  it  is  between  El-Arish  and  Rafah,  and  about  nine  miles  from 
Turkish  territory.  Several  rooms  and  houses  were  cleared  of  sand,  and  the 
principal  discovery  was  that  of  a  large  mosaic  pavement,  10  feet  by  15.  The 
figures  are  clumsy,  apparently  of  the  age  of  Constantine.  The  upper  scene  is  of 
Phaedra  sitting  in  a  porch,  with  pillars  on  either  side,  and  curtains  ;  she  is  resting 
her  head  on  her  hand,  and  looking  anxiously  after  her  nurse,  delivering  tablets  to 
Hippolytcs,  who  stands  accompanied  by  two  huntsmen.  The  lower  scene  is  the 
triumph  of  Dionysos  in  a  car  drawn  by  centaurs,  preceded  by  Silenus  on  an  ass, 
a  satyr  and  a  maenad  dancing.  Below  this  is  Herakles,  two  other  satyrs  and 
a  maenad.  An  inscription  in  praise  of  the  work  comes  at  the  bottom.  The  whole 
is  a  sad  example  of  decadence,  but  is  in  perfect  condition.  It  is  shown  in  three 
excellent  photographs,  embracing  the  whole  width  of  it  without  any  distortion.  It 
is  not  stated  to  have  been  removed,  or  covered  again  to  protect  it.  Two  marble 
statues  of  Aphrodite,  3i  feet  high,  were  found  in  fragments,  and  are  photographed 

C  3 


38  Annales  du  Sennce. 

as  restored.     They  appear  so  good  that  they  might  well  be  a  century  earlier  than 
the  settlement  of  the  place  under  Hadrian. 

The  baths  were  found,  and  the  system  of  heating  is  described.  Also  a  mound 
faced  with  slopes  of  brickwork,  30  feet  by  20  below,  and  24  feet  by  14  at  the  top, 
with  a  flight  of  steps  ascending  it.  Its  purpose  is  unexplained  ;  for  the  steps, 
being  only  2  feet  wide,  could  not  lead  to  a  temple  or  public  building.  The 
cemetery  contained  for  the  most  part  simple  graves  in  the  sand,  sometimes  lined 
or  covered  with  slabs  of  stone.  For  the  richer  class  there  was  a  mausoleum 
with  steps  descending  to  groups  of  loculi,  covered  over  by  a  high  dome.  A  series 
of  six  leaden  weights  seem  to  belong  to  the  double  of  the  Palestinian  standard  of 
177  grains  (ii|  grm.).  Many  stamped  handles  of  wine  jars  point  to  a  pre-Roman 
date ;  but  as  amphorae  were  largely  used  for  foundations  here,  they  may  have  been 
imported  from  an  earlier  place,  and  the  handles  knocked  off  before  they  were  buried. 
Otherwise  the  rise  of  the  settlement  here  must  be  dated  in  Ptolemaic  times. 

Smolenski,  Tadeusz. — Les  peuples  Septeiitrionaux  de  la  Mer  sous  Ramses  II 
et  Mincphtah.  This  long  paper,  by  the  late  librarian  of  the  Cairo  Museum,  collects 
together  the  various  opinions  of  writers  on  the  subject,  and  is  more  a  history  of 
opinion  than  an  addition  to  our  knowledge.  It  may  be  useful  to  future  students 
to  have  such  a  bibliography ;  but  where  occasionally  an  opinion  is  expressed  the 
writer  does  not  seem  familiar  with  comparative  study  of  names.  It  is  not  possible 
to  come  to  conclusions  without  taking  in  the  campaigns  of  Ramessu  III,  as  the 
invasion  of  his  fifth  year  appears  to  have  been  solely  of  westerners ;  and,  as  such, 
it  is  linked  with  the  western  invasion  under  Merneptah.  It  is  unlikelj-  that 
a  combination  of  peoples  of  Algier  with  those  of  Asia  Minor  should  have  occurred, 
when  the  whole  invasion  was  from  the  west.  Those  who  cling  to  the  immature 
guesses  about  Ilion  and  Achaians  would  do  well  to  keep  the  campaigns  clearly 
apart,  and  to  consider  the  separate  course  of  each  movement.  The  writer  states 
that  he  looks  on  it  as  quite  absurd  to  connect  the  name  Agbia  with  El  Aghwat, 
because  the  latter  means  the  Turks,  and  could  not  therefore  descend  from  an 
ancient  name.  He  does  not  seem  to  know  how  readily  names  are  accommodated 
in  popular  use,  as  in  England  we  have  the  dene-holes  or  caves  commonly  altered 
to  Dane  holes,  and  said  to  be  the  work  of  the  Danes. 

Daressy,  Georges. — Cylindre  en  Bronze  de  I'Ancien  Empire.  This  cylinder 
of  bronze  (or  rather  copper?)  was  found  at  Memphis.  It  bears  the  falcon-name 
Sekhem-kliou ;  and  by  an  impression  of  another  cylinder  the  Ra-temple  of  this 
king  is  known  to  be  named  Ast-ab,  which  fixes  him  as  Nefer-ar-ka-ra  of  the 
Vth  dynasty.  A  list  is  then  given  of  the  falcon-names,  cartouches,  pyramid-names 
and  Ra-temple  names  throughout  the  Vth  dynasty.  Lastly,  M.  Daressy  concludes 
"  The  accord  of  the  monuments  with  the  list  of  Africanus  is  therefore  as  satisfactory 
as  possible  for  this  period." 

Edgar,  C.  C. — A  Building  of  Merenptah  at  Mil  Rahineh.  This  is  an  account 
of  the  uncovering  by  natives  of  part  of  the  temple  already  excavated  b)'  the 
British  School.  The  interest  of  it  lies  in  the  stonework  being  inlaid  with  coloured 
glaze  ;  this  is  intermediate  between  the  examples  of  such  work  by  Akhenaten  and 
by  Ramessu  III.  It  seems  extraordinary  that  no  hint  of  this  discovery  was  given 
to  the  British  School  at  that  time  working  at  Lahun,  although  Mr.  Edgar  expresses 
a  wish  to  see  the  whole  building  worked  out.     On  the  contrary,  our  letter  of  enquiry 


Annates  du   Service.  39 

sent  to  the  Museum  regarding  the  excavations  at  Memphis  was  left  unanswered. 
It  is  only  after  the  Department  gave  the  site  to  the  Philadelphia  Museum,  that  the 
British  School  is  allowed  to  know,  by  publications,  what  has  been  done  with  a 
building  already  worked  by  the  School. 

Edgar,  C.  C. — Some  Greek  Inscriptions.  These  eleven  inscriptions  are  nearly 
all  of  the  Roman  period,  and  are  not  of  importance. 

Lefebvre,  Gustave. — Egypte  Cliretienne.  Thirty-two  Coptic  and  Greek 
grave-stones,  nearly  all  from  Antinoe,  are  here  published.  One  bears  a  fi.xed  date, 
of  the  end  of  December  A.D.  620,  and  the  whole  group  from  Antinoe  probably 
belong  to  the  generation  before  the  Arab  conquest.  One  from  Deir  el-Moharraq 
is  dated  in  A.D.  747.  It  would  be  desirable  to  have  photographs  of  all  dated  grave- 
stones for  comparison  of  style  ;  that  of  A.D.  620  appears  in  the  plates. 

Daressy,  Georges. —  Trois  stites  de  ta  periode  Bubastite.  These  steles  are  : 
(i)  of  Usarken  II,  a  gift  of  land,  found  at  Shurafa  ;  (2)  of  Sheshenq  IV,  a  gift  of 
land,  at  Bubastis  ;  (3)  of  Pamay,  from  Bubastis.  The  first  names  "  the  field  of  the 
Shardanna  in  the  land  of  the  prophet  Hera "  ;  this  shows  the  name  of  the 
Shardana  lasting  till  864  B.C.,  but  perhaps  only  as  a  place-name.  This  paper 
should  be  consulted  in  detail  by  anyone  dealing  with  the  Bubastite  history. 

Barsanti,  Alexandre. — Rapports  sur  les  Travaux  executes  an  temple  de 
Seti  /"■  a  Gournah.  Every  visitor  will  remember  the  sea  of  confusion  of  fallen 
roofs  and  walls  which  filled  the  temple  of  Sety.  The  account  is  given  of  the 
thorough  clearing  and  reconstruction  of  the  broken  parts.  A  Nilometer  cistern 
was  discovered,  of  which  a  view  is  given ;  but  the  report  lacks  plans  or  sections, 
although  they  are  referred  to  in  the  text. 

BarsANTI,  Alexandre. — Rapport  sur  les  Travaux  de  consolidation  execute's  a 
Kom  Ombo.  The  repairs  needed  for  safety  at  Kom  Ombo  are  here  described.  It 
is  well  that  some  Coptic  remains  are  now  being  preserved,  as  a  house  and  a  column 
of  the  church  here.  In  a  passage  in  the  house  was  a  basket  with  the  bronze 
furniture  of  the  church  sanctuary  intact.  Both  of  these  reports  are  well  illustrated 
with  photographs. 

Ahmed  Bey  Kamal. — Rapport  sur  les  fouilles  .  .  .  entre  Dcirout  et  Dctr 
el-Ganadlah.  A  further  sad  account  of  the  plundering  of  cemeteries,  with  only  the 
contents  of  a  single  tomb  noted  together,  and  those  so  imperfectly  described  as  to 
be  useless.  This  wrecking  of  a  large  district  has  been  of  no  more  value  to  us 
than  if  the  things  had  been  left  alone.  The  preservation  of  them  in  a  provincial 
museum  at  Siut  is  useless  after  their  history  of  grouping  has  been  destroj'ed.  Let 
us  hope  that  we  shall  see  no  more  of  such  unscientific  plundering  under  professed 
direction  of  the  Museum. 

DARES.SY,  Georges. —  Une  stHe  de  Pancien  empire.  This  stele,  though  brought 
to  Cairo,  was  yet  so  fissured  that  it  has  fallen  to  pieces  and  is  lost.  It  does  not 
seem  to  be  known  that  no  matter  how  fragmentary  a  stone  may  be,  or  how  rotten 
wood  has  become,  flooding  with  melted  paraffin  wa.x  will  always  consolidate  it 
enough  for  preservation.  The  most  decayed  wood,  or  flaking  stone,  may  be  faced 
with  paraffin  for  transport,  and  then  dealt  with  at  leisure. 

It  would  be  a  great  improvement  in  the  Annates  if  the  plates  had  the  locality 
printed  on  each,  and  were  numbered  continuously  in  each  volume  for  reference. 

c  4 


(    40     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin.     Boston,  April,  191 5.     10  cents. 

In  this  number  Dr.  Reisncr  sums  up  his  work  of  the  previous  year.  He  has 
cleared  the  streets  of  mastaba  tombs,  which  stand  to  the  west  of  the  great  pyramid 
at  Gizeh.  The  main  discovery  of  these  excavations  was  the  series  of  eight  portrait 
heads  in  limestone,  which  were  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  entrance  pits  of  the 
tombs.  A  few  such  heads  were  known  already  (Ancient  Egypt,  1914,  125),  but 
the  large  number  now  found  explain  them  further.  They  are  all  separate  heads,  never 
belonging  to  a  statue.  They  are  rather  too  crude  to  be  life  studies  for  the  statues, 
as  the  whole  figures  are  more  suave  and  impersonal.  They  were  always  deposited 
at  the  foot  of  the  tomb  shaft,  not  in  the  chamber,  and  therefore  probably  laid  there 
after  the  mummy  was  deposited,  at  the  close  of  the  funeral  ceremonies.  This  can 
hardly  be  disconnected  with  the  frequent  statements  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  about 
the  giving  of  the  head  to  the  deceased,  in  the  texts  of  Teta,  Unas  and  Pepy.  This, 
in  turn,  seems  clearly  connected  with  the  frequent  severance  of  the  head  of  the 
deceased,  and  placing  it  later  in  the  grave.  Probably  a  primitive  custom  of 
keeping  the  head  (usual  in  many  races  now)  for  some  months  or  years  after  death, 
and  finally  placing  it  in  the  grave,  was  changed  when  complete  burial  became  usual, 
and  then  a  ceremonial  head  was  substituted  for  the  actual  head.  This  ceremonial 
head  may  have  been  that  to  which  offerings  had  been  made  in  the  funeral  service, 
as  to  the  Duen-fubara  in  New  Calabar  at  present  (Ancient  Egypt,  1914,  125). 
Beside  those  heads  which  are  ascribed  by  Dr.  Reisner  to  the  ruling  caste,  there 
are  two  other  types  present.  One  of  these — the  wife  of  a  prince — is  said  to  be 
"  of  a  distinctly  negroid  type."  This  is  given  as  the  first  of  our  portraits  at  the 
end  of  this  number,  and  it  is  there  discussed  in  relation  to  the  head  of  Prince 
Rahetep.  Two  other  heads  are  stated  to  be  of  a  foreign  type  ;  but  in  the  absence 
of  profile  views  the  relation  to  Egyptian  or  other  types  cannot  be  considered. 

Another  very  interesting  subject  is  the  presence  of  Syrian  pottery  in  these 
tombs  of  the  IVth  dynasty.  A  large  jar  is  of  the  characteristic  pottery  known  in 
the  oldest  levels  of  Lachish.  Other  smaller  jars  may  also  be  Syrian,  but  are  not 
so  closely  paralleled  there.  There  do  not  seem  to  have  been  found  any  of  the 
painted  jars,  known  in  the  1st  dynasty  royal  tombs.  It  is  mainly  from  the 
painting  of  these  that  Profs.  Fiirtwangler  and  Wolters  connected  them  with  Greek 
island  pottery,  and  hence  the  term  Aegean  came  to  be  used  for  them  {Royal 
Tombs,  II,  46).  Until  some  such  painting  is  found  in  Syria  at  an  early  date,  the 
Aegean  connection  still  seems  the  more  probable.  That  trade  was  going  on 
there  15  shown  by  the  free  import  of  emery  and  obsidian  in  prehistoric  times  into 
Egypt,  the  Aegean  being  the  nearest  source  for  both  of  these  stones. 

The  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  Part  XI. — B.  P.  Grknfell  and  A.  S.  HUNT. 
1915.     278  pp.,  7  plates. 

This  fresh  instalment  of  the  great  mass  of  papyri  stored  at  Oxford,  is  mainly 
of  Greek  authors  who  do  not  concern   Egypt  in  any  way.      There  is,  however, 


I 


Reviews.  41 

one  papyrus  which  has  on  it  two  documents  of  great  interest,  one  on  either  side. 
One  is  a  Hymn  to  Isis,  reciting  her  various  names  in  different  centres  of  worship, 
of  which  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  remain.  The  other  is  a  vision  of 
Imhetep-Asklepios  to  a  devotee.  The  long  list  of  cities  where  Isis  was  adored 
deserves  careful  geographical  study,  and  eighteen  pages  of  close  text  is  given  to 
that  by  the  editors,  without  approaching  finality.  The  earlier  part  dealing  with 
Upper  Egypt  is  entirely  lost,  and  the  extant  part  begins  with  Aphroditopolis 
(Atfih)  and  Memphis.  The  arrangement  of  the  towns  is  evidently  geographical, 
so  much  so  that  some  light  may  be  thrown  on  the  positions.  After  Memphis  are 
fifteen  places  in  the  west  Delta,  twelve  in  the  N.N.W.  Delta,  four  in  N.N.E., 
six  in  north  and  west  Delta,  twelve  in  east  Delta,  and  nineteen  along  the  coast 
from  west  to  east.  This  ends  the  Egyptian  section  of  seventy  names.  The 
foreign  section  is  of  places  which  are  nearly  all  well  known  and  can  therefore  be 
studied  with  certainty.  The  history  of  this  list  is  curious,  as  shown  by  its 
accretion.  The  original  list  began  in  Asia  Minor,  passed  thence  to  Macedonia, 
Greece,  the  north  Aegean,  and  then  alternately  Karia  and  the  Troad.  Into  this 
list  were  thrust  at  irregular  parts :  Rome,  Italy,  three  of  North  Asia  Minor,  and 
three  pieces  of  a  Syrian  list.  The  original  list  ran  thus  : — Lycia,  Myra,  Knidos, 
Cyclades,  Patmos,  Chios,  Chalcidice,  Pieria,  Delphi,  Thrace,  Thessaly,  Samothrace, 
Pergamon,  Samos,  Hellespont,  Myndos,  Tenedos,  Karia,  Troad,  Dindyma.  The 
eastern  list  ran  thus  : — Paphos,  Salamis,  Cyprus,  Asia  Minor,  f  Petra  (NabatheaPj, 
Hypsele.  Rhinocolura,  Dora,  Caesarea,  Askelon,  Raphia,  Tripolis,  Gaza,  -j-Bambyke, 
Amazons,  Indians,  Persia,  Magi,  Susa,  f  Syrophoenicia  Berytus,  Sidon,  Ptolemais, 
Susa  on  the  Red  Sea.  This  list  is  evidently  a  patchwork  of  four  lists  which 
joined  at  the  \  marks  ;  the  second  and  fourth  belonged  together.  Then  thrown 
in,  without  the  least  relation  to  anything,  are  the  names  of  Cj'rene,  Crete, 
Chalkedon,  Rome,  Delos,  Pontus,  Italy,  and  Bithjnia.  Thus  there  have  been 
three  or  four  successive  accretions,  made  without  any  regard  to  the  original  form 
of  the  list.  This  shows  that  we  must  not  strain  to  make  a  perfectly  continuous 
sequence  of  these  Egj'ptian  lists ;  probably  the}"  were  likewise  comjiiled  out  of 
preceding  materials.  We  have  noticed  above  that  different  districts  of  the  Delta 
are  taken  in  succe.ssion,  but  the  detailed  order  does  not  seem  to  follow  the 
positions  in  regular  sequence.  Isis  is  identified  with  various  other  deities — 
Aphrodite,  Artemis,  Astarte,  Atargatis,  Athena,  Kore,  Dictynnis,  Hekate,  Helen, 
Hera,  Hestia,  lo,  Leto,  Maia,  the  Babylonian  Nania,  Praxidike,  and  Themis. 
This  is  in  accord  with  the  syncretic  ideas  of  that  period.  The  praises  of  the 
universal  goddess  Isis  are  very  similar  to  the  beautiful  address  of  Lucius  to  Isis 
in  Book  XI  of  Metamorphoses.  Indeed,  the  order  of  the  ideas  is  so  far  alike 
that  it  seems  as  if  both  were  editions  of  the  same  ritual  of  Isis  worship.  In  the 
papyrus,  "  guardian  and  guide,  lady  of  the  mouths  of  seas,"  compares  with  Lucius 
praying  "  Thou  dost  protect  men  both  by  sea  and  land " :  "  the  prosperity  of 
observers  of  lucky  days,"  compares  with  "  thy  health-giving  right  hand,  by  which 
thou  dost  unravel  the  entangled  threads  of  the  Fates";  "the  greatest  of  gods, 
ruling  over  mid-air  and  the  immeasurable,"  compares  with  "  the  gods  of  heaven 
adore  thee,  those  in  the  shades  below  do  homage  to  thee."  The  central  point  is : 
"  thou  bringcst  the  sun  from  rising  to  setting,  at  the  risings  of  the  stars  the  people 
worship  thee,"  and  Lucius  says  :  "thou  dost  roll  the  sphere  of  the  universe,  thou 
dost  illuminate  the  sun,  the  stars  move  responsive  to  thy  command."  In  the 
papyrus  "  the  spirits  become  thy  subjects,"  parallel  to  "  the  gods  rejoice  in  thy 
divinity,  the  elements  are  thy  servants  "  ;  "  thou  bringest  decay  on  what  thou  wilt, 


42  Reviews. 

and  to  the  destroj'ed  bringest  increase,  every  day  thou  didst  appoint  for  joy," 
compares  with  "  At  thy  nod  .  .  the  seeds  germinate,  and  the  blossoms  increase." 
All  of  these  passages  follow  in  the  same  order  in  both  documents,  and  the  two 
together  will  give  a  close  idea  of  the  general  Isis  ritual.  Moreover,  the  varied 
names  which  Isis  declares  to  Lucius,  are  parallel  to  the  identities  related  in  the 
papyrus :  the  Pessinuntica,  Athena,  Aphrodite,  Dictynna,  Kore,  Ceres,  Hera, 
Bellona,  Hecate,  Rhamnusia  of  Lucius,  are  mostly  in  the  papyrus  list. 

The  other  document  is  likewise  imperfect  at  both  ends.  The  first  column  or 
two  is  lost,  and  it  begins  with  Nektenibis  being  vexed  at  the  desertion  of  the 
temple  staff,  and  ordering  the  writer  Nechautis  to  search  for  the  priesthood  ot 
Imhetep  in  accord  with  a  document  which  he  has  found.  The  king  then 
orders  the  descendants  of  the  twenty-six  priests  to  resume  their  hereditary 
functions,  and  assigns  an  additional  endowment  of  330  arurae  of  corn  land  for 
them.  The  writer  then  states  that  he  had  often  begun  the  translation  of  this 
document  into  Greek,  but  delayed  it.  A  long  account  follows  of  his  illness,  and 
a  vision  which  appeared  ordering  him  to  proceed  with  the  translation ;  this 
unfortunately  occupies  nearly  the  whole  of  the  e.xtant  papyrus,  and  only  at  the  end 
do  we  reach  the  important  part.  This  relates  that  King  Mencheres  (Menkaura, 
IVth  dynasty)  established  temples  and  endowments  for  Asklepiosson  of  Hephaistos 
(Imhetep  son  of  Ptah),  Horus  son  of  Hermes,  and  Kalcoibis  son  of  Apollo.  The 
latter  two  persons  are  quite  unknown  in  Egyptian  sources.  As  the  name  Horus 
is  used  before,  probably  Apollo  here  is  the  translation  of  Ra.  From  being 
associated  with  Imhetep  these  are  probably  deified  men,  like  Amenhetep  son  of 
Hapi  in  later  times.  Kaleoibis  looks  as  if  Qdr-Jiab,  "  the  pure  boat "  of  a  god ; 
qar,  "the  boat"  occurs  in  the  Vlth  dynasty  as  a  name.  The  original  forms  of 
these  names  would  then  be  Hor  son  of  Tehuti  and  Qar-uab  son  of  Ra. 

Another  unusual  document  is  part  of  the  Calendar  of  Church  Services  at 
Oxyrhynchos,  for  five  months  of  the  year  A.D.  536.  Nearly  half  the  days  were 
saints'  days,  observed  at  one  or  another  of  the  churches  in  the  city.  This  is  by 
far  the  earliest  Coptic  calendar  known,  and  is  only  preceded  by  four  extant 
calendars  of  other  churches. 

The  large  export  of  corn  from  Egypt  to  Greece  by  about  470  B.C.  may  be 
noted  in  an  Ode  to  Alexander  I  of  Macedon,  where  Bacchylides  mentions  "the 
corn-laden  ships  bring  vast  wealth  from  Egypt  over  the  radiant  sea." 

[Mr.  F.  W.  Read  sends  the  following  note  on  details  in  this  papyrus. — W.M.F.P.] 

Line  107:  "bull-faced."  The  editors  connect  this  epithet  with  Isis  in  the 
form  of  a  cow  (p.  192),  and  this  is,  of  course,  quite  possible.  It  may  also  be  an 
adoption  of  the  same  word  in  purely  Greek  compositions,  where  it  is  found  without 
any  reference  to  Egyptian  mythology,  seeing  that  Greek  ideas  were  clearly  more 
prominent  than  Egyptian  in  the  mind  of  the  author.  As,  however,  a  substratum  of 
the  old  mythology  still  remained,  it  may  be  worth  while  noting  that  "  bull-faced  " 
was  regarded  as  an  honorific  epithet  from  quite  an  early  period  of  Egyptian 

history.     This  is  shown  by  the  somewhat  rare  proper  names  =0-.   ^  LJ    and 
i<..^    \    j .     The   meaning  of  the  second,  as  it  stands,  is  by  no  means  clear ; 

but,  taking  the  two  together,  there  is  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  first  should  be 
translated  "  the  face  of  a  bull,"  and  the  second,  "  not  having  the  face  of  a  bull." 
As  all  the  names  of  negative  form  were  certainly  intended,  for  whatever  reason, 


Reviexvs.  43 

to   negate  desirable  qualities   (note   especially  T  ,  "  not  beautiful "),  this 

name,  "  face  of  a  bull,"  or  "  bull-faced,"  must  have  been  honorific,  and  might  well 
be  the  source  of  the  Greek  expression  in  the  papyrus. 

Lines  154-5*."  the  365  combined  days."  Line  204 :  "a  perfect  year."  The 
editors'  note  on  these  passages  (p.  218)  is:  "The  mention  of  the  365  days  may  be 
connected  with  the  circumstance  that  at  Sais  the  5th  intercalary  day,  the  last  of 
the  year,  was  the  birthday  festival  of  Isis ;  c/.  P.  Hibeh,  27,  205."  There  is 
apparently  an  oversight,  as  Grenfell  and  Hunt,  the  editors  of  both  publications, 
have  shown  that  the  Hibeh  Papyrus  agrees  with  all  the  other  evidence  in  fixing 
the  birthday  of  Isis  to  the  4th  epagomenal  day.  The  passage  runs  in  their 
translation  :  "  In  the  five  intercalary  days:  4th,  Arcturus  sets  in  the  evening  .... 
and  the  birthday  festival  of  Isis  takes  place."  The  editors  could  have  had  no 
doubt  about  it,  for  in  a  list  of  festivals  extracted  from  the  papyrus  the  last  is 
"4th  intercalary  day,  Birthday  of  Isis."  Then  we  have  a  note  which  reads  :  "The 
birthday  of  Isis  on  the  4th  intercalary  day  is  mentioned  in  the  Papyrus  Sallier  IV, 
the  Esneh,  Edfu,  and  Dendereh  calendars,  and  by  Plutarch,  De  hide  et  Osiride,  12." 
This  note  shows  the  consensus  of  evidence  on  the  point,  but  is  not  quite  accurate 
since  the  epagomenal  days  are  not  mentioned  in  Payrus  Sallier  IV.  The  editors 
(or  an  Egyptologist  consulted  by  them)  have  evidently  been  misled  by  the  fact 
that  a  table  of  the  epagomenal  days  was  given  by  Chabas  in  the  work,  "  Le 
Calendrier  des  jours  fastes  et  nefastes,"  in  which  he  translated  Papyrus  Sallier  IV  ; 
this  table  was  derived  from  Leyden  Papyrus  I,  346.  There  is  nothing  in  Egyptian 
to  justify  the  association  of  Isis  with  the  arrangement  of  the  calendar;  all  this, 
like  much  else  in  the  papyrus,  stands  entirely  apart  from  the  true  Egyptian 
tradition. 


The  Rock  Tombs  of  Meir,  Part  II. — AylwarI)  M.  Blackman.  46  pp., 
35  plates.     4to.     25J.     191 5. 

This  volume  is  the  continuation  of  the  first  part  of  the  Meir  tombs  which  we 
summarised  in  ANCIENT  EGYPT,  191 5,  p.  84.  The  present  instalment  of  the 
work  is  excellently  done.  The  whole  tomb  of  Ukh-hetep  .son  of  Senbi  is  copied 
in  outline  ;  as  it  is  on  varying  scales  of  \,  ^,  and  ^,  a  key-view  of  the  whole  walls 
would  have  been  desirable  to  show  the  relative  size  of  each  part.  The  details  are 
given  more  fully  in  15  photographic  plates,  which  are  far  more  clear  than  most  such 
publications,  and  4  plates  of  signs  and  details  drawn.  The  Beja  herdsmen  figure 
here  as  in  the  other  tomb;  the  fight  of  the  boatmen  is  also  a  good  subject,  but 
otherwise  most  of  the  sculptures  are  of  the  kind  usual  in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasty, 
though  here  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  Xllth  dynasty.  An  unusual  feature 
is  the  large  amount  of  squaring  left  on  the  walls,  owing  to  the  intended  carving 
never  having  been  executed,  and  the  drawing  being  left  unchanged.  This  seems 
to  be  the  original  squaring  for  the  draughtsman,  and  not  later  lines  put  on  for 
the  .sake  of  copying  as  was  done  at  Gizeh  in  the  Vth  dynasty  tombs.  Rare  figures 
of  animals  are  the  giraffe  and  the  Mesopotamian  deer  with  branching  horns ; 
Mr.  Blackman  might  have  added  to  his  references  the  earliest  dated  one  in 
Medum,  XXVII.  Among  the  signs  which  are  specially  figured  and  discussed, 
the  seutli,  twisted  cord,  is  stated  here  to  be  the  earliest  example  ;  but  it  occurs 
on  several  cylinders  of  the  1st  dynasty  (ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1914,  75).  The  sign 
klur  is  not  a  drain  or  sink,  but  obviously  a  tripod  stand  used  for  upholding  vases, 
two  legs  in  front  and  one  seen  at  the  back  ;  hence  its  meaning  of  "  under,"  •'  being 


44  Reviews. 

laden,"  or  "supporting."  The  suggestion  that  the  w^/^r  sign  is  derived  from  little 
flags  put  on  sacred  places,  as  in  Nubia  at  present,  would  agree  with  such  a  sign  as 
is  seen  on  poles  before  a  shrine  in  the  1st  dynasty  {Royal  Tombs  II,  x,  2),  but 
would  be  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  constant  division  of  the  top  of  neter  into 
two  strips  in  all  early  examples. 

The  Civilisation  of  tlu  Ancient  Egyptians.— h.  BOTHWELL  GOSSE.  Large 
8vo,  161  pp.,  154  figures.     SJ.     (Jack.) 

The  publishers  have  a  good  scheme  of  freely  using  the  facilities  of  modern 
illustration  to  familiarise  general  readers  with  different  civilisations,  ancient  art, 
and  present  science.  The  illustrations  of  the  present  volume  are  largely  drawn 
from  Wilkinson  and  Lepsius,  with  the  mannerisms  of  both  styles ;  there  are  also 
many  photographs,  which  will  give  a  sounder  view  of  Egyptian  art.  The  twelve 
chapters  comprise  the  general  scope  of  the  civilisation  as  known  to  us,  though 
mainly  from  large  monuments  and  literature  rather  than  from  the  smaller  objects 
of  daily  life  and  usage.  Little  of  the  large  stores  of  domestic  material  in  our 
museums  has  been  drawn  upon,  doubtless  because  illustrations  of  these  are  not  to 
be  had  so  readily  as  of  the  great  monuments  ;  it  would  be  very  desirable  to  bring 
forward  more  of  the  actual  surroundings  of  daily  life,  such  as  have  been  so  well 
arranged  and  published  for  Roman  life,  in  the  British  Museum.  The  text  of 
the  book  shows  a  good  general  acquaintance  with  the  various  branches  of  the 
subject  and  the  publications,  without  the  serious  mistakes  which  are  too  often 
seen  in  popular  books.  A  few  points  might  be  amended,  as  the  mention  of  cotton 
being  cultivated,  of  cutting  hard  stones  with  metal  tools,  or  of  enamelling,  none 
of  which  were  in  use.  As  a  whole,  the  book  may  be  commended  as  a  good 
all-round  view  of  ancient  Egyptian  life  and  its  real  spirit  and  feeling,  especially 
for  elder  children,  for  whom  the  text  seems  intended. 

Amentet,  an  Account  of  the  Gods,  Amulets,  and  Scarabs  of  the  Ancient 
Egyptiatis. — A.  E.  Knight.     8vo,  274  pp.,  many  figures.     12s.  6d.     (Longmans.) 

This  is  announced  as  being  a  compendium  for  the  collector ;  accordingly  it 
adopts  the  dictionary  form  of  alphabetic  arrangement  rather  than  a  systematic 
view.  It  is  thus  a  book  of  reference,  and  not  a  treatise  to  be  used  for  general 
ideas.  The  author  frankly  states  that  the  different  sections  of  it  are  drawn  from 
Daressy's  Cairo  Catalogue  of  Divinities,  Budge's  Gods  of  the  Egyptians,  and  Petrie's 
Amulets.  For  those  who  have  no  larger  works  at  hand,  this  practical  hand-list 
may  be  of  use,  as  being  correct  in  essentials,  and  with  but  few  misprints.  Where 
corrections  of  the  sources  have  been  attempted,  they  are  not  all  successful.  The 
frontispiece  is  a  travesty  of  Egyptian  style,  which  shows,  we  fear,  that  the  author 
is  not  acquainted  with  Egyptian  art.  It  is  most  unfortunate  that  not  only  here, 
but  also  in  the  largest  series  of  figures  of  gods  lately  issued,  the  public  is  entirely 
misled  as  to  Egyptian  drawing  and  detail  of  style.  Nothing  like  these  figures 
was  done  in  any  age  of  Egypt.  On  p.  6  the  body  of  faience  figures  is  said  to  be 
"a  kind  of  frit  made  of  powdered  schist  or  limestone."  It  is  safe  to  say  that 
neither  of  these  materials  was  ever  used  ;  the  body  is  of  very  fine  and  pure  quartz 
.sand,  with  a  trace  of  binding  material,  probably  alkali.  The  origin  put  forward 
for  the  onkh  sign  is  impossible  in  view  of  the  early  forms,  with  bow  knot  and  two 
ends,  which  can  only  be  understood  as  a  tied  girdle.  The  kheses  is  not  an  "  angle 
amulet,"  as  an  angle  may  be  of  any  number  of  degrees  ;  it  is  a  square,  which 
properly  means  a  right-angle,  as  a  "  carpenter's  square " ;  the  use  of  square  for 


Reviews.  45 

an  enclosed  figure  is  only  a  recent  corruption  of  English.  The  section  on  scarabs 
is  the  least  successful ;  though  said  in  the  preface  to  be  "  well  up  to  date,"  it  is 
far  from  complete  or  accurate.  Only  sealings  of  two  kings  are  named  in  the 
1st  dynasty,  though  others  of  all  eight  are  known.  Den-Setui  is  put  in  the 
Ilnd  dynasty.  The  most  complete  collection  is  treated  as  having  been  scattered, 
many  references  being  given  to  objects  "  formerly  in  the  Petrie  Collection,"  tliough 
the  whole  of  those,  and  many  more,  are  to  be  seen  any  day  in  University  College. 
Another  cylinder  is  said  to  be  "in  the  Poignon  Coll."  Long  ago  it  was  lost 
to  sight,  then  bought  from  a  dealer,  and  is  now  safe  in  London  (Univ.  Coll.). 
An  old  statement  is  quoted  that  the  earliest  cartouche  is  of  the  Ilird  dynasty; 
but  the  cartouche  belongs  to  kings  of  the  1st  dynasty  on  the  new  pieces  of 
the  Annals.  The  statements  of  the  numbers  and  rarity  of  scarabs  are  very 
incomplete.  Saptah's  and  Tausert's  are  not  rare,  hundreds  were  found  in  their 
temple  deposits.  Of  Rameses  VII  there  are  none  in  the  British  Museum 
Catalogue,  and  Rameses  IX  should  now  be  placed  as  Saptah  II  in  the  XlXth 
dynasty.  The  whole  of  this  section  should  have  been  done  thoroughly,  or  left 
alone ;  incomplete  statements  are  of  no  use  to  a  student  or  a  collector.  The 
author  does  not  seem  to  know  the  Louvre  Collection  (p.  260),  or  he  would 
remember  one  of  the  most  striking  objects  among  the  scarabs,  the  marble 
monstrosity  of  the  Antonine  age,  which  he  asserts  to  be  the  same  as  the  green 
granite  colossal  scarab  of  the  British  Museum.  We  hope  that  further  experience 
will  enable  the  author  to  amend  a  work,  which,  in  any  case,  will  be  welcome  to 
a  large  number  of  collectors. 

A  Coloured  Drawing  of  the  Madeba  Mosaic  Map. — I.  M.  Casanowicz. 
{^Proc.  United  States  Nat.  Mus.     Vol.49.)     J9'5- 

This  is  a  publication  of  a  hand  copy  of  the  celebrated  mcsaic  map  of  Palestine 
and  the  Delta,  which  is  confessedly  not  completely  accurate.  It  seems  hardly 
worth  while  to  issue  a  less  perfect  copy  than  those  already  published.  The 
Egyptian  interest  of  it  is  in  giving  the  road  across  the  Delta  from  Pelusium  to 
Alexandria,  by  Sethrois,  Tanis,  Thinnis,  Beunesos,  Xois,  and  Khereu  ;  but  as  this 
is  placed  along  the  east  side  of  the  Sebennyte  arm  it  is  evident  that  the  map 
maker  quite  mistook  the  arrangement  of  the  sources  that  he  had. 

Notes  on  Bisharin. — Prof  Seligman.  {Man,  June,  1915.) 
The  resemblance  of  some  Bishari  objects  to  Egyptian  forms  is  striking.  The 
basket  used  for  milk  is  like  the  baskets  of  the  1st  dynasty.  The  wooden  headrest 
is  of  a  type  known  in  the  Old  Kingdom.  The  basket  with  a  pattern  of  black 
and  white  triangles  is  of  the  family  of  basketry  of  the  later  prehistoric  age.  All 
these  fashions  were  extinct  long  before  3000  B.C.  and  therefore  it  is  the  less  likely 
that  they  were  borrowed  from  the  Egyptians.  We  should  rather  see  in  these  the 
descendants  of  the  types  which  entered  Egypt  from  the  desert  people,  some 
7,CXX)  years  ago ;  a  simple  desert  tribe  will  maintain  styles  unlimitedly,  as  in  the 
pottery  of  the  Algerian  Mountains  which  belongs  to  the  family  of  the  Egyptian 
work  about  io,cxx)  years  ago. 

The  Stela  of  Sebek-khn. — T.  Eric  Peet.  8vo,  22  pp.,  2  plates.  2s. 
Manchester  Museum.     1914. 

This  is  a  re-edition  of  the  stele  translated  by  Newberry  in  El-Arabah.  It  is 
of  historical  value  as  a  record  of  the  earliest  known  war  by  Egyptians  in  Syria. 


46  Reviews. 

Senusert  III  is  said  to  have  gone  to  Sekmem,  where  he  was  attacked  by  Sekmem 
and  the  Retenu,  and  fought  with  the  Aam  (Syrians).  Sebek-khu  distinguished 
himself  and  was  rewarded  by  the  king.  So  far,  the  position  of  Sekmem  has  not 
been  identified.  The  guess  of  Max  Miiller  placing  it  at  Shechem  is  unlikely, 
as  an  Egyptian  would  not  so  soon  have  penetrated  into  the  hill  country. 

General  Guide  to  the  Collections  in  the  Manchester  Museum. — ^  pp., 
8  plates,     id.     (Longmans.)     191 5. 

Manchester  has  long  been  known  as  having  one  of  the  best  Museums  outside 
of  London,  especially  in  Zoology  (fossil  and  recent)  and  Egyptology.  The 
present  well-packed  catalogue  gives  a  quarter  of  its  pages  to  Egypt.  A  general 
outline  of  the  history  and  early  period  of  the  country  is  given,  and  the  classes  of 
antiquities  of  each  age  are  described.  A  main  feature  of  the  collection  is  the  large 
number  of  groups  from  tombs,  and  the  precise  localising  and  date  of  the  objects, 
which  have  nearly  all  come  from  registered  excavations. 


(     47     ) 


NOTES    AND    NEWS. 


So  far,  we  have  not  heard  of  any  losses  to  English  Egyptology  since  the  lamented 
death  of  Mr.  Dixon.  Mr.  Engelbach,  who  was  at  Suvla  Bay,  is,  we  hope,  now 
moved  to  safer  quarters.  Mr.  Eric  Feet  has  now  a  commission  in  the  A.S.C., 
and  will  be  in  active  service.  Dr.  Derry  has  been  for  some  time  in  the  Hospital 
Force  in  the  Mediterranean.  Prof.  Ernest  Gardner — in  the  guise  of  a  Naval 
Lieutenant — is  using  his  great  knowledge  of  modern  Greeks,  their  ways  and  their 
language,  on  the  Salonika  Expedition.  Miss  Rowdon,  who  took  the  diploma  in 
Egyptology,  is  in  the  Admiralty  Office.  Mr.  Sidney  Smith,  a  former  student  of 
Egyptology  at  University  College,  and  later  on  the  British  Museum  staff,  was 
wounded,  and  is  invalided  home  from  France.  Likewise  Mr.  Hambley  is  invalided 
back  from  the  Dardanelles.  Miss  Theodora  Dodge — as  an  American  neutral — 
worked  on  hospital  and  relief  work  at  Brussels  for  nine  months ;  the  strain  of 
repression  there  has  now  sent  her  home. 

Foreign  archaeology  has  suffered  much  more  severely.  Beside  the  immense 
loss  of  perhaps  the  most  accomplished  European  archaeologist,  M.  Joseph 
Ddchelette,  and  M.  Jean  Maspero — already  noticed  here — we  now  learn  of  the 
death  of  Prof  Strack  the  principal  authority  on  the  Ptolemies,  of  Prof  Sudhaus 
the  Hellenic  scholar,  and  of  the  son  of  Prof.  Willamovitz-Moellendorf.  The 
address  which  the  latter  professor  lately  gave  in  Berlin  was  a  sorrowful  forecast 
of  all  Europe  being  split  into  two  worlds,  without  the  least  scientific  intercourse 
within  the  lifetime  of  any  scholar  now  living.  Such  must  be  the  result  of 
a  determination  to  grasp  by  every  means,  fair  or  foul,  "  world-power  or  going 
under."  Such  an  aim  could  have  but  one  result,  the  permanent  division  of 
Europe,  and  annihilation  of  all  intercourse  ;  those  who  adopted  that  formula  could 
have  been  under  no  illusion  as  to  the  result.     They  have  rent  the  world. 


(     48     ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 

The  limestone  head  found  by  Dr.  Reisner  in  a  tomb  of  the  IVth  dynasty  at 
Gizeh,  is  of  a  heavier  and  rather  coarser  type  than  that  usually  seen  among  the 
upper  class  of  Egyptians  of  that  age.  The  discoverer  goes  so  far  as  to  say  :  "  The 
wife  of  the  prince  is  curiously  enough  of  a  distinctly  negroid  type.  The  head  is 
I  believe  the  earliest  known  portrait  of  a  negro.  The  woman  seems,  however, 
not  of  pure  negro  blood,  and  may  possibly  be  the  offspring  of  an  Egyptian  and  a 
negro  slave  girl."  This  seems  rather  a  low  estimate  of  a  form  which  is  only  rather 
prognathous ;  the  lips  show  no  trace  of  negro  eversion,  and  do  not  differ  from 
those  of  some  of  the  other  heads,  while  the  nose  is  slightly  aquiline.  The  obvious 
connection  of  this  head  is  with  that  of  Prince  Rahetep,  given  here  as  the  second 
portrait.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  a  profile  photograph  available,  so  a  three- 
quarter  head  is  illustrated,  which  shows  sufficiently  the  type  of  the  profile.  Every 
detail  seems  to  be  like  the  Gizeh  head  ;  the  flat  and  high  forehead,  and  slight 
brows,  the  angle  of  the  nose  and  its  curvature,  the  high  cheek-bone,  the  position 
of  the  jaw  and  mouth,  the  angle  of  the  lips  and  facings,  the  curve  of  the  chin. 
The  one  head  is  just  as  much — or  as  little, — negro  as  the  other.  Rahetep  was 
a  son  of  a  king,  probably  of  Seneferu  as  his  tomb  was  at  Meydum.  He  was  by 
no  means  slighted,  as  he  had  the  honour  of  being  High  Priest  of  Heliopolis, 
governor  of  Buto,  and  a  general,  besides  holding  various  other  dignities.  This  does 
not  seem  as  if  he  were  son  of  a  negro  slave,  but  rather  on  an  equality  with  any  other 
prince.  He  was  probably  buried  in  the  reign  of  Khufu,  and  hence  the  Princess  of 
Gizeh,  buried  in  the  reign  of  Khafra,  would  seem  to  have  been  one  of  his  daughters 
of  whom  three  are  known  in  his  tomb  sculptures,  Nezem-ab,  Setet,  and  Merert. 
Where  this  type  came  from  it  is  difficult  to  say  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  com- 
parisons. The  form  of  the  nose  is  that  of  the  chief,  probably  of  the  Fayum  or 
North-west  Delta,  who  is  represented  upon  the  slate  palette,  as  being  smitten  by 
Narmer.  The  mouth  and  jaw,  however,  are  heavier,  and  not  so  Semitic  in  type  ; 
there  is  no  parallel  for  it  among  the  early  types  known  in  Egypt,  and  some 
additional  influence  between  the  1st  and  IVth  dynasty  must  be  supposed. 


A 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


U 


NOTE  ON  THE  GORRINGE  COLLECTION. 

In  1879  the  arrangements  for  the  transport  of  the  obelisk  from  Alexandria  to 
New  York  were  undertaken  by  the  government  of  the  United  States.  For  this 
purpose  Lieut.-Commander  Henry  H.  Gorringe  was  sent  out,  and  after  many 
obstacles  he  began  to  move  the  obelisk  on  28th  October,  1879.  He  succeeded  in 
floating  it  by  ist  June,  1880,  and  it  was  erected  at  New  York  on  23rd  February, 
1 88 1.  During  his  stay  in  Egypt  his  occupation  about  the  obelisk  drew  his 
attention  to  the  antiquities,  and  he  formed  a  collection  which  he  brought  home 
with  him.     After  his  death  this  collection  was  entirely  lost  to  sight. 


Terra-cotta  Figures  of  Harpocrates. 
Roman  Period.  Gorringe  Collection. 


Female  Figures  and  Bust  op  Isis. 
Roman  Period.  Gorringe  Collection. 


A  notice  of  my  discovery  of  the  Gorringe  Collection  of  Egyptian  antiquities, 
and  a  short  description  of  the  same,  appeared  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux  relatifs 
a  la  Philologie  et  a  F Archdologie  cgyptienues  et  assyriennes.  Vol.  XXXVI.     The  most 


50 


Note  on  the  Gorringe  Collection. 


important  piece  of  the  Collection,  the  mortuary  stela  of  Ptahmes,  was  there 
described,  its  text  having  been  published  in  Vol.  XXVII  of  the  same  Journal  by 
Ahmed  Bey  Kamal  in  an  article  entitled  Sur  une  stele  auj'ourd'/iui  perdue.  The 
mortuary  stela  of  Ptahmes,  as  an  examination  of  it  shows,  belongs  to  the  XlXth 
dynasty,  and  is  in  an  excellent  state  of  preservation. 


Bronze  Figures  of  Eros,  Satyr,  Heraklks  wrestling,  etc. 
Roman  Period.  Gorringe  Collection. 


Figures  of  Osiris,  Sekhmet,  Neitii,  and  Isis. 
XXVIth  Dynasty.  Gorringe  Collection. 

The  Collection  contains  many  other  valuable  and  interesting  objects.  Among 
them  are:  Two  beautiful  sphinxes  of  limestone,  both  21  inches  by  12  inches  by 
8  inches ;  two  limestone  Horus  birds,  both   14A  inches  long  and  I2|  inches  high; 


Note  on  the  Gorringe  Collection. 


51 


a  fine  mummiform  figure,  17  inches  high  and  13  inches  round  the  shoulders,  well 
preserved  and  painted  in  brown,  black,  and  gilt ;  a  late  marble  statue  of  Rameses  II 
with  the  double  crown  and  the  itraeus,  22 i  inches  high  and  18  inches  round  the 
shoulders ;  eight  .small  terra-cotta  figures  ;  many  fine  bronze  statues  probably- 
belonging  to  the  Saite  age,  among  them  being  Sekhet,  Tefnut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Tum, 


Bronze  Figure  of  Ptolemy  X  Lathyros. 

Gorringe  Colleciion. 

(See  p.  95  and  end  portraits.) 

Anubis,  Hathor,  Re,  and  others  ;  about  fifty  small  charms,  among  them  being 
examples  of  the  ankh,  the  ihet,  the  dad,  and  the  uaa,  the  hr,  \heynt,  etc. ;  terra-cotta 
rings ;  many  scarabs,  some  valuable ;  some  pottery ;  many  bronzes ;  and  one  of 
the  claws  of  the  New  York  obelisk. 

D  2 


52 


Note  on  the  Gorringe  Collection. 


There  is  also  a  fine  collection  of  Oriental  coins  containing  about  three  hundred 
pieces,  many  of  which  are  valuable.  Among  the  Greek  objects  is  an  ancient  torso 
of  Marsyas,  an  early  copy  of  the  original  of  Myron  of  the  first  half  of  the 
fifth  century,  B.C. 

There  is  a  stela  of  sandstone  measuring  21 J  inches  by  15^  inches  by  2  inches. 
It  bears  the  cartouche  of  Thutmose  IV  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.     Behind  the  Apis 


Bronze  Figure  of  Ra  and  Amulet  Box  of  Obelisk  Form 

Dedicated  to  Bastet. 

XXVIth  Dynasty.  Gorringe  Collection. 


is  the  name  of  Amon-Re,  lord  of  heaven  ;  and  before  it  is  the  Hor  of  the  upper 
and  lower  world.  The  text  contains  a  series  of  laudatory  titles  in  four  horizontal 
lines,  reading  from  right  to  left.  There  are  reasons  for  believing  that  the  stela  is 
a  forgery. 

The  accompanying  figures  are  a  fair  representation  of  the  contents  of  the 
Collection. 

Samuel  A.  B.  Mercer. 


(  S3  ) 


AN  EARLY  REPRESENTATION  OF  TAURT. 

The  ivory  comb  of  which  a  photograph  (natural  size)  is  here  reproduced  was 
bought  from  a  dealer  in  Luxor  early  in  19 14.  It  is  of  a  well-known  character, 
common  at  the  end  of  the  predynastic  period  or  early  in  the  dynastic,  but  specially 
interesting  in  that  it  portrays  the  Hippopotamus-goddess  Taurt  in  the  highly 
stylised  form  and  conventional  position  in  which  she  is  habitually  represented  in 
later  times. 


Ivory  Comb 
WITH  Figures  of  Taurt. 

Representations  of  the  deities  of  prehistoric  times  are  rare  ;  and,  although 
I  have  not  been  able  to  make  an  exhaustive  search  through  literature,  I  believe 
that  no  such  early  example  of  Taurt  has  been  recorded.  The  fine  image  in  the 
British  Museum  cut  from  a  hard  breccia  may  be  regarded  as  archaistic  rather  than 
archaic.  The  fact  that  she  is  here  represented  in  her  conventional  form  on  an 
object  of  no  ceremonial  importance,  seems  to  indicate  that  even  at  the  early  period 
to  which  this  comb  belongs,  the  cult  of  the  goddess  was  already  fully  established. 

C.  G.  Seligman. 


D  3 


(    54    ) 


THE   EGYPTIAN   ELEMENTS    IN   THE   GRAIL   ROMANCE. 

{^Continued^ 

Incidents  shoiving  an  Egyptian  Origin. 

Further  proofs  of  the  Egyptian  origin  of  this  portion  of  the  Grail  Romance  are 
also  found  in  the  passages  which  relate  to  the  Grail  itself  and  to  Josephes.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  legend,  Joseph  is  told  to  make  a  wooden  ark  ("  a  luytel  whucche," 
as  the  alliterative  "  Lyfe  "  expresses  it).  This  is  to  contain  the  Holy  Blood,  and 
various  marvellous  sights  are  seen  by  those  who  look  into  it ;  it  is  covered  with 
a  "  plateyne,"  a  word  hitherto  unexplained.  The  account  of  the  use  of  the  ark 
points  to  a  Christian  ceremony,  but  a  ceremony  not  in  use  in  the  Western  Church. 
When,  however,  the  Coptic  rite  is  investigated,  the  wooden  ark  is  found  to  play 


1.     Sacramental  Arks  of  Arabic  and  Byzantine  Styles. 
Coptic  Museum,  Cairo. 


a  large  part  in  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist.  Butler  {Coptic  Churc/ies,  Vol.  II, 
pp.  42,  43)  says :  "  Every  Coptic  altar  is  furnished  with  a  wooden  ark  or 
tabernacle  ...  It  is  a  regular  instrument  in  the  service  of  the  mass,  and  at  other 
times  lies  idle  upon  the  altar.  It  consists  of  a  cubical  box,  eight  or  nine  inches 
high,  the  top  side  of  which  is  pierced  with  a  circular  opening  just  large  enough  to 
admit  the  chalice.  At  the  consecration  the  chalice  is  placed  within  the  tabernacle, 
and  the  rim  when  it  is  thus  enclosed  is  about  flush  with  the  top,  so  that  the  paten 
rests  as  much  on  the  tabernacle  as  on  the  chalice.  The  four  walls  of  the  tabernacle 
are  covered  with  sacred  paintings — our  Lord  and  St.  John  being  the  most  frequent 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


55 


figures."  The  ark  is  so  important  and  sacred  in  the  Coptic  ritual  that  there  is 
a  special  prayer  for  its  consecration  :  "  O  Lord  our  God,  who  didst  command  Moses 
thy  servant  and  prophet,  saying :  Make  me  precious  vessels  and  put  them  in  the 
tabernacle  on  Mount  Sinai,  now,  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  stretch  forth  thy  hand 
upon  this  ark,  and  fill  it  with  the  virtue,  power,  and  grace  of  thy  Holy  Ghost,  that 
in  it  may  be  consecrated  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Thine  only  begotten  Son  our 
Lord."i  Joseph's  wooden  ark  was  then  the  tabernacle  of  the  Coptic  rite.  In  the 
actual  celebration  of  the  mass  according  to  the  Coptic  ritual,  the  priest,  after  the 
prayer  of  oblation,  places  on  the  chalice  a  little  flat  round  mat,  made  of  silk 
stiffened  with  some  coarser  material  ;  this  I  take  to  be  the  "  plateyne,"  or  little  flat 
thing,  which  Nasciens  lifted  up  in  order  to  look  inside  the  chalice. 


3.     Sacrame.ntal  Table  of  Carved  Wood. 
Fifth  Century,  a.d.  Coptic  Museum,  Cairo. 


Coptic  ritual  is  found  again  in  the  consecration  of  Josephes.  The  ceremony 
began  with  a  procession  issuing  from  the  ark  ;  two  angels  came  first,  sprinkling 
holy  water ;  they  were  followed  by  two  others,  each  carrying  a  golden  bowl  and 
a  towel ;  then  three  more  bearing  golden  jewel-encrusted  censers  and  boxes  of 
sweet  spices.  After  these  came  an  angel  on  whose  forehead  was  written  "  ie  sui 
apieles  forche  del  tres  haut  signour  "  ;  upon  his  two  hands  was  a  cloth,  green  as  an 
emerald,  on  which  rested  the  Grail ;  on  his  right  was  an  angel  carrying  a  head,  the 
richest  ever  man  saw ;  on  his  left,  another  angel  bearing  a  sword  of  silver  and  gold. 


'  Neale,  Eastern  Church,  Gen.  Introduction,  I,  p.  186. 


D4 


56 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


Behind  them  were  three  angels  carrying  coloured  tapers,  and  then  came  Christ, 
robed  in  the  robes  of  a  celebrant  priest.  The  first  angels  sprinkled  the  people,  and 
then  went  round  about  the  "palace"  sprinkling;  when  they  arrived  before  the  ark 
they  bowed  to  Christ  and  to  the  ark.  Christ  called  Josephes,  then  took  him  by  the 
right  hand  and  drew  him  close,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  him.  There 
issued  from  the  ark  a  grey-haired  man  carrying  vestments,  and  a  young  man  with 
a  white  and  vermilion  crook  in  one  hand,  and  a  mitre  in  the  other.  They  robed 
Josephes,  the  sandals  being  put  on  first,  and  seated  him  in  the  richest  chair,  such  as 
never  before  was  seen.  All  the  angels  then  came  before  him,  and  Christ  anointed 
and  consecrated  him ;  the  holy  oil  was  deposited  in  the  ark.  Christ  placed  the 
ring  on  Josephes'  finger,  and  gave  an  address  on  the  mystical  meanings  of  the 
vestments.     Josephes  then  celebrated  mass. 

The  points  of  coincidence  between  this  and  the  Coptic  rite  are  best  seen  by 
putting  the  two  in  parallel  columns.  The  Coptic  ritual  is  taken  almost  verbatim 
from  Butler's  Coptic  Chtinlies. 


Coptic  Church  of  Abu  Sergeh,  Ikonostasis  removed  except  on  Left. 
Photograph  by  Rev.  C.  T.  Campion. 


Josephes. 

I.  The  ark  becomes  a  room  from  which  the 
angels  issue. 


2.  Josephes  stands  at  the  door  of  the  ark, 
two  angels  holding  his  arms  ;  one  angel  bears 
an  ampulla,  the  other  a  censer  and  bo.\. 


Coptic. 

1.  The  sanctuary  is  closed  with  a  solid 
wooden  screen  (Fig.  4),  which  makes  it  appear 
like  a  bo.x.  The  procession  at  a  consecration 
issues  from  the  sanctuary. 

2.  The  patriarch  stands  below  between  the 
altar  and  the  throne,  and  faces  eastward,  a 
priest  holding  him  on  either  side. 


% 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


57 


3.  Josephes  gazes  into  the  ark  and  sees  an  altar 
draped  in  white,  and  on  it  the  instruments  of 
the  Passion  and  the  Grail  covered  with  red 
samite. 


3.  The  ordinary  covering  of  a  Coptic  altar  is 
a  tightly  fitting  case  of  silk  or  cotton,  sometimes 
dyed  a  dim  colour.  Before  a  celebration,  besides 
the  ordinary  covering  the  altar  must  have  a 
second  vestment,  which  shrouds  the  whole  fabric. 
All  the  vessels  must  be  in  readiness  upon  the 
altar,  and  before  the  commencement  of  the 
mass  the  sacred  elements  are  covered  with  a 
veil  of  white  or  coloured  silk  (Fig.  5). 


5.    Veiled  Ark 


iiiK.  .\i.i AK.     Coi'Tic  Church  of  Abu  Sbyfeyn,  Cairo. 
Photograph  by  Mrs.  Butcher. 


4.  Two  angels  head  the  procession  sprinkling 
holy  water. 

5.  Two  angels,  each  carrying  a  golden  bowl 
and  a  towel. 


6.  Three  angels  carrying  golden  censers  and 
boxes  of  sweet  spices. 

7.  Three  angels  ;  the  middle  one  bearing  the 
Grail  which  rests  on  a  green  cloth  ; 

8.  the  angel  on  the  right  bears  a  head ; 


5.  The  cover  and  basin,  for  the  washing  of 
hands  at  the  mass,  are  part  of  the  complete 
furniture  of  a  Coptic  altar.  In  the  Latin  Church, 
ewer,  basin,  and  towel  were  given  to  the  deacon 
at  ordination. 

At  the  consecration  of  a  patriarch,  first  come 
deacons  bearing  uplifted  crosses,  burning  tapers, 
and  flabella  (Fig.  6)  ; 

6.  Then  a  priest  swinging  a  thurible  (Fig.  7). 


8.  It  was  customary  for  the  patriarch  sitting 
on  the  throne  to  hold  the  head  of  St.  Mark  [this 
was  on  the  last  day  of  the  consecration  festival]. 


58 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  tlu  Grail  Romance. 


9.  the  angel  on  the  left  bears  a  sword. 

10.  Angels  carrying  coloured  tapers. 

11.  Christ    in    sacramental    garments 


tells 


Josephes  that  he  is  to  be  the  sovereign  bishop. 
Josephes  is  vested  in  pontifical  robes  and  seated 
on  the  episcopal  throne.  All  the  angels  come 
before  him,  and  Christ  anoints  and  consecrates 
him. 


II.  The  senior  bishop  lays  his  right  hand 
upon  the  head  of  the  patriarch,  while  the  arch- 
deacon makes  a  proclamation  ;  again  he  lays  on 
his  hands  and  recites  the  invocation.  Then  the 
bishop  signs  the  patriarch  with  a  cross  upon  the 
head  [the  language  of  the  rubric  here  rather 
suggests  the  use  of  chrism,  but  is  not  clear  upon 
the  point],  proclaims  him  "archbishop  in  the  holy 
Church  of  God  of  the  g^eat  city  of  Alexandria," 
and  vests  him  with  the  patrashil  and  chasuble. 
After  many  prayers  the  chief  bishop  and  all  the 
bishops  lay  on  their  hands  ;  and  when  the 
patriarch  has  received  the  pall  and  cope,  crown 
and  staff,  he  is  led  up  to  the  throne  and  thrice 
made  to  sit  on  it  ;  bishops,  clergy,  and  laity,  all 
salute  him. 


6.     Coptic  Deacon  keading  the  Gospel. 
Photograph  by  Mrs.  Butcher. 


12.  Josephes  celebrates  mass. 

13.  The  bread  becomes  flesh  and  the  wine 
blood. 


14.  Christ  tells  Josephes  to  divide  the  bread 
into  three  parts. 

15.  Josephes  sets  Leucam  to  watch  the  ark 
day  and  night. 


12.  The  patriarch,  directly  after  consecration 
proceeds  to  celebrate  the  Eucharist. 

13.  The  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence,  of  the 
change  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  very  body 
and  blood  of  our  Lord,  is  held  by  the  Copts  in 
its  most  physical  literalness. 

14.  The  celebrant  signs  the  oflete  thrice,  and 
breaks  it  into  three  portions. 

15.  In  Egypt  the  practice  of  reser\Mng  the 
host,  which  has  long  been  discontinued,  once 
prevailed. 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


59 


The  most  striking  of  these  coincidences  is  the  importance  of  a  dissevered  head 
in  the  ceremony.  The  Grail  legend  indicates  that  it  was  carried  round  the  church 
to  be  seen  by  all ;  and,  though  there  is  no  mention  of  such  a  procession  in  the  ritual 
of  the  consecration  of  a  patriarch,  it  is  certain  that  so  holy  a  relic  must  have  been 
borne  in  solemn  pomp  from  its  resting  place  to  the  enthroned  patriarch.  There  is 
a  procession  recorded  in  connection  with  this  sacred  head.  When  the  Church  of 
St.  Mark  at  Alexandria  was  destroyed,  a  ship's  captain  stole  the  head  of  the  saint ; 
the  ship  miraculously  refused  to  leave  the  city  until  the  head  was  restored  to  the 
patriarch,  Benjamin,  "  And  the  Father  Patriarch  returned  to  the  city,  carrying  the 
head  in  his  bosom,  and  the  priests  went  before  him  with  chanting  and  singing,  as 
befitted  the  reception  of  that  sacred  and  glorious  head "  (Evetts,  History  of  the 
Patriarchs  of  the  Coptic  Church,  in  Patrol.  Orient,  I,  p.  500).  The  Grail  legend  also 
states  emphatically  that  the  head  was  richly  decorated  ;  at  the  service  when  the 
newly  consecrated  patriarch  held  the  head  of  St.  Mark  he  placed  a  new  veil  or 
covering  upon  it.     It  was  this  veil  evidently  which  was  richly  ornamented. 


7.    Coptic  Priest  censing  the  Concregation. 
Photograph  by  Mrs.  Butcher. 


The  procession  of  the  Grail  appears  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  Great  Entrance 
of  the  Eastern  Church,  the  solemn  bringing  in  of  the  sacred  elements.  This  is 
a  purely  Eastern  rite,  which  is  not  found  in  the  Latin  Church.  In  the  Coptic 
Church  this  ceremony  has  dwindled  down  to  the  carrying  of  the  wafer  round  the 
altar  by  the  priest,  followed  by  deacons  bearing  lighted  tapers ;  in  the  Melkite 
Church,  however,  the  procession  is  conducted  with  greater  splendour. 

The  vestments  with  which  Josephes  was  clothed  appear  to  be  those  in  use  in 
the  Coptic  and  Byzantine  Churches.  Mystical  meanings  assigned  to  different 
vestments  first  appear  in  Europe  about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century ; 
there  is  no  proof  that  these  meanings  were  found  in  the  Book  of  Melkin  so  it  is 
impossible  to  .say  that  they  come,  with  the  rest  of  the  story,  from  Egypt. 

Though  many  of  the  points  which  coincide  with  the  Coptic  ritual,  will  coincide 
equally  well  with  the  Western  rite,  yet  there  is  a  residuum  which  is  not  Western  ; 


6o 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 


and  of  these  definitely  Eastern  practices  some — such  as  the  richly  decorated  head — 
point  with  equal  certainty  to  Eg>'pt  Even  the  fraction  of  the  oflete  into  three 
seems  to  have  been  peculiar  to  the  Roman,  Ambrosian  (Milan),  and  Alexandrian 
rites.  It  seems  then  that  we  have  an  account  of  a  ceremony  of  an  Eastern  Church, 
"  edited "  by  someone  to  whom  only  the  Western  ritual  was  familiar,  and  who 
therefore  added  the  parts  which  he  thought  had  been  omitted  by  the  original 
author. 

The  Book  of  Melkin  makes  a  curious  and  interesting  statement  in  these  words: 
"  For  Joseph  has  with  him,  in  the  sarcophagus,  two  little  vases,  white  and  silver, 
filled  with  the  blood  and  sweat  of  the  prophet  Jesus.  When  his  sarcophagus  shall 
be  found  again,  whole  and  unharmed,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  future  and  will  be  open 


The  Shield  of  Joseph  with  the  Flagons  or 
Cruets. 
From  tlie  black-letter  copy  of  the  Lyfe  of  loseph  of  Armathia, 
printed  by  Ricliard  Pynson  in  1520. 

to  the  whole  world.  Then  from  that  time,  neither  water  nor  dew  of  heaven  shall 
ever  fail  the  inhabitants  of  this  noble  island "  {Jolm  of  Glastonhurv,  Hearne's 
edition,  p.  30).  The  two  little  vases  or  fassula  are,  as  Skeat  pointed  out,  evidently 
the  same  as  the  two  little  cruets  represented  on  the  title  page  of  the  black  letter 
Lyfe  of  loseph  of  Armathia,  printed  by  Richard  Pynson  in  1520.  The  two  cruets 
are  part  of  the  altar  vessels  for  the  Eucharist  in  most,  if  not  at  all.  Christian 
churches.  One  cruet  is  for  wine  and  one  for  water,  which,  in  the  Book  of  Melkin, 
are  symbolised  as  the  "  blood  and  sweat  of  the  prophet  Jesus."  Though  there  is 
nothing  peculiarly  Coptic,  or  even  Eastern,  in  the  use  of  cruets  at  the  Eucharist, 
there  seems  to  have  been  some  special  ritual  concerning  them  in  the  Coptic  Church 
at  some  early  period.     "There  is  one  singular  usage  of  the  Copts.  ...  In  several 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  6i 

of  the  churches,  though  not  in  all,  a  small  glass  crewet,  filled  with  unconsecrated 
wine,  may  be  seen  resting  in  a  cup-like  wooden  crewet-holder,  which  is  nailed  on 
to  the  haikal-screen  outside,  and  usually  towards  the  north.  There  is  no  such 
arrangement  in  the  Cairo  Cathedral,  nor  does  the  position  of  the  crewet  connect  at 
all  with  any  point  of  the  present  ceremonial.  One  can  only  surmise  that  it  is  the 
relic  of  some  forgotten  ritual  practice.  At  Sitt  Mariam  Dair  Abu  's-Sifain  there  are 
two  such  crewet-holders  on  the  screen"  (Butler,  Coptic  Churches,  II,  p.  55).  As 
regards  the  term  "  the  prophet  Jesus  "  I  shall  have  more  to  say  later. 

The  sarcophagus  of  Joseph  is  mentioned  in  the  Perceval  le  Gallois,  where  it  is 
the  magical  coffin  which  will  open  only  for  the  Best  Knight  in  the  World.     Within 


9.    Coptic  Flacon.    British  Museu.m. 

it  were  the  pincers,  still  bloody,  with  which  the  nails  were  removed  from  the  hands 
and  feet  of  The  Crucified  (Evans,  High  History,  I,  9  ;  XV,  23,  24  ;   XVIII,  25). 

In  every  mention  of  Josephes  it  is  always  said  that  he  was  consecrated  by 
Christ  Himself;  though  Lovelich's  version  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the 
consecration  and  though,  as  I  have  shown,  it  coincides  in  a  remarkable  manner 
with  the  Coptic  ritual,  there  is  nothing  in  that  ritual  analogous  with  the  statement 
that  Christ  is  present  in  person  and  actually  performs  the  act  of  the  laying  on  of 
hands.  But  Dr.  A.  J.  Butler  has  called  my  attention  to  the  parallels  in  Coptic 
history  given  in  Evetts'  History  of  the  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria  {Patrol.  Orient.,  t.  i, 
fasc.  4).  "  Demetrius  "  [the  12th  patriarch]  "  had  a  gift  from  God,  which  was  that 
when  he  had  finished  the  liturgy,  before  he  communicated  any  one  of  the  people,  he 


62  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

beheld  the  Lord  Christ,  giving  the  Eucharist  by  his  hand"  (p.  156).  And  the 
celebrated  patriarch  Benjamin  thus  relates  how  he  consecrated  the  church  of 
St.  Macarius  in  the  Wady  Natrun,  and  marked  the  consecration-crosses  upon  it. 
"  When  I  marked  the  sanctuary  with  the  chrism,  I  saw  the  hand  of  the  Lord  Christ, 
the  Saviour,  upon  the  walls  anointing  the  sanctuary"  (p.  510).  He  repeats  the 
statement  again  :  "  I  beheld  with  my  own  sinful  eyes  the  holy  palm,  the  sublime 
hand,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour,  anointing  the  altar-board  of  this  holy 
sanctuary"  (p.  511).  Here  it  was  a  church,  and  not  a  bishop,  that  Christ  "sacred 
with  his  owene  hande,"  but  it  is  a  proof  that  the  idea  of  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
visibly  taking  part  in  an  act  of  consecration  was  known  to  the  Copts. 

Another  interesting  proof  of  the  connection  with  Egypt,  and  the  derivation 
both  of  names  and  religious  ideas  from  that  country,  lies  in  the  name  of  the  castle 
in  which  the  Grail  was  finally  housed.  This  is  given,  in  Lovelich's  version,  as 
Corbenie.     It  is  said  to  be  a  Chaldean  word  : 

"  This  Castel  scholde  ben  Clepid  Corbenie, 
And  in  Caldev  was  this  scripture, 
whiche  Is  to  vndirstonde  As  be  lettrure, 
as  this  place  frely  schal  be, 
Trosour  Of  the  holy  vessel  ful  Sykerle." 

The  resemblance  of  Corbenie  to  the  Biblical  Corban  has  been  noted  by  many 
commentators  on  the  Grail  Legend.  The  true  derivation  is  the  Arabic  ^^.li  J  , 
Qurbdn,  the  usual  name  in  the  Coptic  Church  for  the  Eucharist.  The  Arabic  itself 
is  adopted  from  the  Syriac  Qurbana,  which  is  the  equivalent,  in  ecclesiastical 
language,  of  the  Greek  %vaia.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  "  offering,"  or 
more  literally  "  bringing  near,"  and  the  word-group  to  which  it  belongs  is  found  in 
Hebrew,  Arabic,  and  Syriac.  The  form  Corbenie  reproduces  exactly  the  Arabic 
word  Qurbdnl,  the  nisba-ioxm.  of  the  noun,  which  means  "  Belonging  to  the 
Eucharist."     Castle  Corbenie  then  means  "The  House  of  the  Eucharist." 

The  little  human  touch,  where  Sarracynte  as  a  little  girl  is  frightened  of  the 
hermit,  is  another  suggestion  of  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  legend  : 

"  For  Certein  he  hath  A  long  berd,  and  An  hore. 
And  Euere  whanne  I  lokede  vppon  his  berd, 
Sekir,  Modir,  I  scholde  ben  Aferd." 

The  cliffs  and  wadys  of  Egypt  were  full  of  cells  and  hermits  in  early  Christian 
times.  Most  of  the  hermits  neglected  their  personal  appearance,  and  let  both  hair 
and  beard  grow  to  a  great  length,  so  that  the  wild  appearance  of  one  of  these 
strange  solitaries  would  certainly  alarm  any  child.  The  reputation  for  sanctity  and 
for  powers  of  healing,  which  such  men  acquired,  seems  to  have  been  very  great, 
judging  from  the  incidents  recounted  in  the  lives  of  hermit-saints. 

A  noteworthy  fact  is  that  the  kingdom  of  Sarras  did  not  go  from  father  to  son. 
Evalach,  a  foreigner,  was  appointed  king  by  his  predecessor  ;  on  his  departure  from 
Sarras  (as  Mordrayns)  he  appoints  Aganore  to  succeed  him.  Evalach  is  said  to 
have  a  son,  who  does  not  come  into  the  story  ;  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  he  is 
dead,  yet  he  is  not  Evalach's  successor.  Later  on  Galahad  and  Percival  come  to 
Sarras  and  find  King  Estourause  upon  the  throne ;  on  his  death,  Galahad  is 
appointed  king.  There  are  two  interesting  points  here,  both  connected  with  the 
names  of  the  foreigners,  Evalach  and  Galahad,  who  obtain  the  crown:  (i)  It  is 
a  very  suggestive  fact  that  the  name  Evalach  can  be  derived  from  Ibn  al  Ukht, 


Tlie  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  63 

"  the  Son  of  the  Sister."  Seeing  that  the  right  to  the  throne  of  Egypt  went  in  the 
female  Hne,  either  by  inheritance  or  by  marriage,  down  to  as  late  a  period  as  the 
Roman  Conquest,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  dominion  of  a  small  principality  like 
Sarras  followed  the  same  custom.  Among  a  people  who  practise  matrilineal 
descent,  brother-and-sister  marriage  is  the  common  usage ;  and  it  is  more  than 
likely  that  in  a  royal  family — which  is  always  more  conservative  as  to  ancient 
customs  than  families  of  lower  rank — "  Sister's  Son  "  might  indicate  the  heir,  and 
be  a  title,  not  a  name.  The  great  importance  of  the  queen  in  the  narrative  points 
to  her  being  of  as  high  rank  as  her  husband.  (2)  As  regards  the  reign  of  Galahad, 
Maqrizi  gives  a  little  information.  In  speaking  of  the  Goliath  (Galut)  whom  David 
killed,  he  says :  "  His  son  Galut  went  to  Egypt  where  the  kings  of  Madian  were 
reigning ;  they  installed  him  in  that  country  as  king  of  the  western  region,  but  in 
the  end  he  went  away  to  the  West"  {Bouriant's  translation,  M.A.F.,  XVII,  p.  412). 
The  name  Goliath,  in  Hebrew  n^7Jl,  is  rendered  in  Arabic  as  c:_>plj>-  Galut,  in  the 
Koran,  cjIjJ.^  Gilyit,  in  the  Synaxarium  ;  the  Septuagint  has  the  spelling  ro.viAA 
which  shows  the  vocalisation.  It  is  therefore  a  tri-syllabic  name  containing  the 
three  consonants  GLD  (or  T)  and  is  the  Oriental  equivalent  of  the  Western  form 
Galaad  or  Galahad.  We  have  then  not  only  the  equation  of  the  name,  but  the 
same  fact  recorded  by  an  Arab  historian  which  is  already  known  to  us  from 
European  sources,  that  a  foreigner  of  this  name  was  king  of  the  western  side  of  the 
Delta.  The  name  Galahad  is  also  connected  with  Sarras,  when  Joseph's  son 
Galahad  is  begotten  there.  This  Galahad  was,  according  to  some  of  the  genealogies, 
the  ancestor  of  Sir  Lancelot  (whose  baptismal  name  was  Galahad)  and  therefore  of 
the  great  Sir  Galahad,  who  thus  bore  a  family  name. 

I  have  not  attempted  to  discuss  the  history  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  before  his 
appearance  in  Egypt,  but  I  cannot  help  quoting  here  a  story  extant  in  Coptic 
literature  which  may  account  for  the  mention  of  St.  Philip  as  the  Apostle  who 
taught  and  baptised  Joseph.  There  was  an  Egyptian  silversmith,  named  Philip, 
a  Christian,  who  had  a  friend  named  Theodosius,  a  Jewish  priest  and  a  man  of  high 
rank  in  Jerusalem.  Philip  tried  for  some  time  to  convert  Theodosius,  and  at  last, 
on  one  of  his  journeys  in  Syria  he  met  Theodosius,  who  had  heard  the  Virgin  Mary 
herself  relate  the  story  of  the  virgin  birth,  and  had  therefore  embraced  Christianity. 
"  And  I,  Philip,  had  great  joy  with  Theodosius  the  neophyte.  And  when  many  of 
the  Jews  saw  this,  knowing  that  he  was  one  of  the  teachers  of  the  Law  among 
them,  and  that  he  was  a  ruler  over  them,  and  had  acquired  great  honours  among 
them,  and  then  had  abandoned  all  that,  and  become  a  Christian,  many  of  them 
believed  and  were  baptised  "  (Evetts,  History  of  the  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria,  in 
Patrol.  Orient.,  I,  p.  134).  The  account  of  the  virgin  birth,  as  given  by  Theodosius, 
is  very  similar  to  the  dogmatic  portions  of  the  Grail  legend  ;  and  the  description  of 
Theodosius  himself,  and  the  effect  of  his  conversion  upon  his  friends  is  practically 
the  same  as  the  account  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  the  parallel  being  made  closer 
by  the  name  of  the  Christian  teacher. 


Pndications  of  Date. 

The  story  by  the  time  it  reaches  us  has  obtained  many  additions  and  accretions. 
The  latest  part  is  probably  the  statement  of  dogma  given  in  the  consecration  of 
Josephes,  in  the  dreams  and  their  interpretations,  and  other  doctrinal  portions. 
Of  the  first  of  these  Mr.  Henry  Jenner  says  : 


64  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

"When  J osephes  goes  into  the  ark  to  consecrate,  'il  n'i  dist  ke  ches  paroles 
seulement  ke  ihesus  crist  dist  a  ses  disciples  en  la  chaine,'  and  '  si  devint  tantost  li 
pains  chars  and  li  vins  sans,'  etc.  Now  this  deliberately  takes  the  Western  side  in 
what  was  then  a  very  fierce  controversy — whether  the  consecration  was  effected  by 
the  recitation  of  the  Words  of  Institution  {^Hoc  est  eniin  Corpus  vteiim  and  Hie  est 
Calix  Sanguinis  mei)  or  by  the  subsequent  iTrUXTjirti;  or  Invocation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  is  found  clearly  expressed  in  all  Eastern  rites,  sometimes  more  or  less 
clearly  in  the  variable  'Post  Pridie '  prayers  in  the  Hispano-Gallican  rites,  and 
vaguely,  if  at  all,  in  the  Roman.  It  was  not  until  about  the  twelfth  century  that 
men  began  to  inquire  about  the  moment  at  which  the  Consecration  took  place. 
Until  that  time  they  were  content  to  know  that  when  the  Priest  began  '  I/anc 
igitur  oblationein'  bread  and  wine  were  on  the  altar,  and  when  he  came  to  the 
end  of  the  prayer  before  the  Paternoster  they  had  become  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
Christ,  and  that  the  consecration  was  effected  by  the  prayer  of  the  Church.  The 
Great  Elevation,  with  the  direction  ' genuflexus  adorat'  and  ^ ostendit  populo' 
after  each  of  Our  Lord's  words,  was  introduced  about  the  year  I2CX),  to  mark  the 
exact  moment,  which  had  been  left  vague  by  the  Lesser  Elevation  (which  is  still 
made)  at  the  end  of  the  whole  prayer.  The  rather  materialistic  sequel,  '  et  lor  vit 
iosephes  apiertement  ke  il  tenoit  un  enfant,'  etc.,  is  no  doubt  directed  towards  the 
controversy  on  transubstantiation  raised  in  the  eleventh  century  by  Berengarius  of 
Tours,  and  not  finally  settled  till  the  Fourth  Lateran  Council  in  1215." 

This  part  then  is  European,  and  therefore  lies  outside  the  scope  of  this  inquiry, 
as  it  would  have  been  added  after  the  story  arrived  in  England. 

The  form  of  the  story,  and  many  of  the  names,  are  Arabic,  the  most  important 
name  being  that  of  the  manuscript,  in  which  apparently  occurs  the  earliest  mention 
of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  and  from  which  probably  the  whole  legend  was  derived, 
namely,  the  Book  of  Melkiii.  This  shows  that  the  date  must  be  later  than  the 
Arab  Conquest  in  641.  The  only  method  of  arriving  at  the  date,  which  can  after 
all  only  be  approximate,  is  to  discover  at  what  period  the  Arabic  manuscript,  or 
a  Latin  version  of  it,  may  have  been  brought  to  England.  The  legend  itself  is  said 
to  have  been  written  by  Christ : 

"  For  ther  Neuere  was  Creature  so  hardy 
that  dorste  with-sein  this  holy  stor)', 
Whiche  Crist  him  self  with  his  Owne  hond 
It  wrot  vs  forto  don  to  vndirstond  .... 
For  we  ne  Radden  neuere  In  non  storye 
that  Crist  him  Self  wrot  Sekerly 
to  forn  his  passiown  In  Ony  stede 
but  In  two.  As  we  don  Rede, 
Whanne  to  Moises  he  wrot  the  lawe  .... 
the  Secund  was  whanne  the  Jewes  certeinly 
a  womman  hadden  take  In  Avowtry." 

The  French  version  says  that  the  first  writing  of  Christ  was  the  Lord's  Prayer 
which  he  wrote  on  stone.  In  this  story  we  have  again  that  same  idea,  which  appears 
to  be  Coptic,  of  the  hand  of  Christ  visibly  engaged  in  some  physical  action. 

Other  versions,  however,  state  that  the  whole  account  was  revealed  by  God  to 
a  hermit.  Even  Lovelich,  in  spite  of  the  statement  quoted  above,  that  Christ  was 
the  actual  writer,  says,  in  another  place,  that  it  was  a  hermit  who  recorded  the 
story  [the  blank  in  the  second  line  of  the  quotation  occurs  in  Furnival's  edition] : 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  65 

"  This  storye 
.  .  .  that  myn  sire  Robert  Borron  here 
From  latyn  Into  frensch  translated  this  Matere, 

^    Next  After  that  holy  Ermyt 

^   that  god  him  Self  hadde  taken  it." 

The  Perceval  le  Gallois  and  the  Merlin  are  very  definite.  " '  Sir,'  saith  the 
priest,  'this  Castle  is  the  Castle  of  Inquest,  for  nought  you  shall  ask  whereof  it  shall 
not  tell  you  the  meaning,  by  the  witness  of  Joseph,  the  good  clerk  and  good  hermit 
through  whom  we  have  it,  and  he  knoweth  it  by  annunciation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ' " 
{High  History,  VI,  11).  In  the  Merlin  the  hermit  had  once  been  a  knight,  he  was 
sister's  son  to  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  and  was  called  Nascien  after  Duke  Nascien  : 
"  and  this  same  knyght  was  after  ravished  be  the  holy  goste  into  the  thridde  heuene, 
where  he  saugh  a-pertely  the  fader,  sone,  and  holy  goste.  This  knyght  hadde  after 
the  storie  in  his  kepinge,  and  wrote  with  his  owne  hande  by  comaundement  of  the 
grete  maister"  (xx  f.,  114  b,  ed.  Wheatley). 

I  take  this  to  mean  that  the  manuscript  was,  traditionally,  in  the  possession  of 
some  hermit.  The  idea  of  its  divine  origin  may  mean  that  its  provenance  was  lost 
though  there  remained  a  tradition  of  its  antiquity,  and  of  its  coming  from  some 
country  in  the  East,  where  Christ  had  lived;  but  it  is  more  likely  that,  like  the 
account  of  the  sacring  of  Josephes,  and  the  consecration  of  the  church  by  Benjamin, 
the  divine  origin  is  an  integral  part  of  the  story,  and  derives  from  a  Coptic  original. 

The  personality  of  the  hermit  may  perhaps  throw  a  little  light  on  the  origin  of 
the  legend.  In  the  Perceval  le  Gallois  he  is  said  to  have  been  Josephes:  "This 
high  history  witnesseth  us  and  recorded  that  Joseph,  who  maketh  remembrance 
thereof,  was  the  first  priest  that  sacrificed  the  body  of  Our  Lord,  and  forsomuch 
ought  one  to  believe  the  words  that  come  of  him  "  {High  History,  IX,  8).  Here 
the  hermit  was  the  son,  in  the  Merlin  he  was  the  nephew,  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea ; 
in  other  words  he  was  one  of  the  band  of  Eastern  Christians  who  brought 
Christianity  to  the  Western  shores  of  Britain. 

Leland's  opinion  about  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  is  perhaps  worth  noting  in  this 
connection :  "  I  cannot  easily  believe  that  Joseph,  a  disciple  of  the  ever-blessed 
Christ,  was  buried  at  Glastonbury.  Yet  I  might  have  believed  that  some  very 
holy  hermit  of  the  same  name  was  buried  there,  and  that  so  this  error  arose " 
{Commentarii  Scriptoribus  Britannicis,  ed.  Hall,  pp.  41-42). 

The  Church  of  Egypt  dates  back  traditionally  to  St.  Mark,  i.e.,  to  the  period 
of  the  Apostles ;  and  Egypt,  always  interested  in  religion,  rapidly  became 
a  Christian  country.  From  Egypt  monasticism  and  asceticism  were  introduced 
into  the  Western  churches :  the  monastery  of  St.  Antony,  the  hermits  of  the 
Thebald,  were  models  which  were  copied  throughout  Europe.  Christianity  was 
spread  by  Eastern  missionaries,  and  the  British  Church  claims  to  have  sprung  from 
such  a  source,  whose  doctrine  had  been  brought  direct  from  the  East  without 
passing  through  Europe.  That  there  were  connections  between  Egyptian  and 
British  Christianity  is  evidenced  by  certain  definite  statements.  Eucherius,  Bishop 
of  Lyons  (died  450),  says  that  Egyptian  monks  settled  in  Gaul ;  other  Egyptian 
monks  are  known  to  have  settled  in  Ireland,  where  they  died  and  were  buried. 
St.  Congar  of  Congresbury,  whose  staff  also  miraculously  became  a  tree,  was  "  the 
son  of  a  Constantinopolitan  Prince  "  ;  he  went  to  the  West  of  England,  and  King 
Ina  "bestowed  on  him  that  portion  of  Land,  call'd  afterward  by  his  name;  and 
withall  built  for  him  a  Mansion  and  Oratory  there  "  (Cressy,  Church  History,  p.  63, 

E 


66  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

ed.  1668).  This  was  in  "  the  year  of  our  Lord  scaven  hundred  and  eleaven."  In 
Glastonbury  the  settlement  of  "  hermits  "  at  the  foot  of  the  Tor  dates  from  a  very 
early  period,  and  seems  from  the  account  to  have  been  conducted  on  the  same 
system  as  the  Egyptian  latira.  St.  Patrick  disapproved  of  the  system,  and 
reformed  the  hermits,  bringing  them  under  monastic  rule  and  forming  them  into 
a  monastery.  "And  afterwards  coming  to  Glastonbury  in  A.D.  449,  he  gathered 
together  twelve  brethren,  whom  he  found  there  living  as  anchorites.  And  taking 
upon  himself,  although  unwillingly,  the  office  of  Abbot  by  the  wishes  and  votes  of 
all,  he  showed  these  same  brethren  how  to  live  the  life  of  the  cloister.  For  it  was 
owing  to  him  that  the  order  of  monks  at  Glastonbury  had  its  origin  :  of  monks 
ordering  their  life  after  the  manner  of  the  Egyptians.  For  that  golden  star, 
St.  Benedict,  had  not  yet  arisen,  who  should  illumine  the  whole  earth  with  his 
doctrine  and  by  his  example "  (Ussher,  Britannicaruni  ecclesiarum  antiquitates, 
p.  no,  ed.  1639).  Here  then,  I  think,  we  can  see  a  possible  way  by  which  the 
legend,  perhaps  in  the  form  of  the  Book  of  Melkin,  might  come  to  England. 
Though  it  is  customary  to  look  upon  the  Egyptian  Christians  as  bigoted  and 
ignorant,  it  is  very  certain  that  this  was  not  true  of  all.  Learning  still  flourished 
in  Alexandria,  and  manuscripts  of  that  early  time  are  still  extant,  which  prove  that 
scholarship  and  the  ability  to  write  large  volumes  were  not  uncommon.  Such 
a  manuscript  as  the  Book  of  Melkin  might  well  have  been  brought  over  by  the 
Egyptian  missionaries,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have  been  in  the 
form  of  a  Latin  translation.  It  undoubtedly  belonged  to  Glastonbury,  for  John 
of  Glastonbury  quotes  from  it,  and  Leland  actually  saw  the  manuscript,  or  rather 
the  fragment  which  still  survived,  when  he  visited  the  Abbey  before  the  Dissolution. 
This  fragment  seems  to  have  been  treated  with  very  little  care,  for  Leland  found  it 
when  ransacking  the  library  for  ancient  books.  From  the  little  which  he  says,  it 
would  appear  to  have  contained  little,  if  any,  more  than  the  few  lines  quoted  by 
John  of  Glastonbury.  Leland  however  states,  apparently  on  the  authority  of  the 
manuscript,  a  few  biographical  details  concerning  Melkin,  whom  he  takes  to  have 
been  a  real  person,  born  in  Wales  and  trained  as  a  bard.  But  it  is  quite  possible 
that  the  eirly  translator  of  the  Kitabu  '1-Melkiyyin  took  the  latter  word  to  be 
a  personal  name,  equating  it,  as  John  Harding  did,  with  Mewinus.  But  earlier 
than  either  Leland  or  John  of  Glastonbury  there  is  mention  of  a  manuscript  at 
Glastonbury  which  contained  the  Grail  legend.  This  comes  down  to  us  as  the 
Perceval  le  Gallois,  which  ends  with  the  words :  "  The  Latin  from  whence  this 
history  was  drawn  into  Romance  was  taken  in  the  Isle  of  Avalon,  in  a  holy  house 
of  religion  that  standeth  at  the  head  of  the  Moors  Adventurous  "  [«.<■.,  the  moors 
round  Glastonbury],  "  there  where  King  Arthur  and  Queen  Guenievre  lie,  according 
to  the  witness  of  the  good  men  religious  that  are  therein,  that  have  the  whole 
history  thereof,  true  from  the  beginning  even  to  the  end."  This  version,  as  will  be 
seen  below,  contains  indications  of  an  Arabic  origin. 

As  regards  the  date,  or  dates,  of  the  story  itself,  the  legend  implies  that  the 
action  takes  place  in  the  second  half  of  the  first  century,  about  A.D.  75.  This  is 
taking  the  date  of  the  Crucifixion  at  A.D.  33  and  adding  to  it  the  forty-two  years  of 
Joseph's  imprisonment.  This  accords  fairly  well  with  the  portions  referring  to  the 
Christianising  of  Egypt,  which  may  have  begun  in  the  latter  part  of  the  first  century ; 
but  the  history  of  Egypt  under  Vespasian  and  Titus  shows  that  the  country  was  at 
peace,  therefore  the  war  between  Evalach  and  Tholome  cannot  belong  to  the  same 
stratum.  It  is  a  very  noticeable  fact  in  the  long  history  of  Egypt  that  whenever 
there  was  no  central  government,  or  when  that  government  was  weak,  the  country 


The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance.  6/ 

tended  to  split  up  into  small  states,  all  more  or  less  at  war  with  one  another. 
When  a  powerful  ruler  arose  in  one  of  these  small  principalities  and  succeeded  in 
conquering  his  neighbours  and  annexing  their  kingdoms,  Egypt  became  a  united 
whole,  only  to  ^k  again  into  petty  princedoms  when  the  strong  hand  was  relaxed. 
The  war  between  Evalach  and  Tholome  is  evidently  one  of  such  internecine  wars, 
following  hard  upon  a  similar  war  in  which  Evalach  had  taken  part  in  his  youth, 
when  he  had  been  rewarded  by  obtaining  the  kingdom  of  Sarras.  From  this  part 
of  the  story,  though  evidently  historical,  we  can  obtain,  then,  no  indication  of  date, 
for  even  the  weapons  and  methods  of  fighting  might  belong  to  any  period.  The 
name  Tholome  also  shows  only  that  the  form  in  which  the  story  was  told  was  later 
than  the  Ptolemaic  era,  for  a  king  of  a  reigning  house  would  not  be  made  into  the 
villain  of  the  piece,  but  it  is  no  proof  that  the  story  itself  was  so  late.  As  it  stands, 
the  description  of  the  campaign  might  belong  to  any  period  of  Egyptian  history ; 
even  the  white  knight  is  not  necessarily  Christian,  but  might  be  Horus,  whose 
attributes  were  taken  over  by  St.  George. 

The  second  part  offers  a  piece  of  negative  evidence  in  the  fact  that  Josephes  at 
his  consecration  stands  free  except  for  the  angels  holding  his  arms  ;  whereas  from 
the  ninth  century  onwards,  the  patriarch  was  brought  in  chains  to  his  consecration. 
Therefore,  this  part  of  the  story,  at  any  rate,  dates  before  the  ninth  century. 

In  the  third  part  of  the  tale,  there  are  perhaps  the  clearest  indications  of  date. 

An  account  of  Pompey's  war  upon,  and  destruction  of,    the  Cilician   pirates   is 

brought  into  the  chapter  concerning  Mordrayns'  Rock  in   which  the  defeat  and 

ghastly  fate  of  the  pirate  Fowcairs   is  detailed  at   length.     A    fairly   sure  date, 

however,  is  given  by  the  mention  of  the  Persians.     These  come  into  the  story  twice  : 

first,  where  two  ships  containing  the  Persian  king  and  his  soldiers,  on  their  way  to 

a  campaign  in  Syria,  are  driven  by  stress  of  weather  to  take  refuge  at  Celidoine's 

Island ;    second,  where  the  messengers  find  at  Alexandria  the  king  of  Persia's 

daughter  in  a  ship  full  of  dead  Persian  soldiers.     There  were  two  Persian  wars  in 

the  Eastern  Mediterranean  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.     In  the  first, 

the  Persians  invaded  the  Delta  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  ;  in  the  second,  the 

Persians  under  Chosroes  II  held  Egypt  for  ten  years,  about  6i6  to  626.     Before 

invading  Egypt  Chosroes  II  had  conquered  Syria,  and  it  is  said  that  he  was  there 

converted  to  Christianity.     In  the  legend  King  Labell  is  on  his  way  to  fight  in  Syria, 

and  he  also  becomes  a  Christian.     We  shall  not  then  be  far  wrong  in  putting  the 

third  part  of  the  legend  at  some  period  after  the  first  quarter  of  the  seventh  century. 

There  is  also  another  point  which  may  help  to  fix  the  date,  if,  as  I  suppose, 

the  Book  of  Melkin  was  the  origin  of  this  legend.     In  this  Book  Christ  is  spoken  of 

as  "the  prophet  Jesus."     In  the  Perceval  le  Gallois  the  same  expression  occurs 

also  :  "  All  these"  [i.e.,  Alain  li  Gros  and  his  brothers]  "died  in  arms  in  the  service 

of  the  Holy  Prophet  that  had  renewed  the  Law  by  his  death "    (Evans,    High 

History,  I,  i).     And  when  King  Arthur  has  had  the  vision  of  the  Real  Presence, 

the  hermit  says  to  him,  "  God  grant  you  may  amend  your  life  in  such  sort  that  you 

may  help  to  do  away  the  evil  Law  and  to  exalt  the  Law  that  is  made  new  by  the 

crucifixion  of  the  Holy   Prophet"  {id.  ib.   I,  8).     This  is  not  the  epithet  that  a 

Christian  would  apply  to  Christ,  but  it  is  precisely  the  name  by  which  a  Mussulman 

would  speak  of  him.     In  the  Koran,  "Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary,"  is  mentioned  several 

times  as  one  of  the  chief  prophets  of  the  world,  to  whom  signs  and  wonders  were 

vouchsafed,  but  his  divinity  is  explicitly  denied  as  the  following  quotations  will 

show :  "  To  Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  gave  we  clear  proof  of  his  mission,  and  strengthened 

him  by  the  Holy  Spirit"  {Sura  II),  "  In  the  footsteps  of  the  prophets  caused  we 

'  E  2 


68  TJu  Egyptian  Elements  in  the  Grail  Romance. 

Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary,  to  follow,  confirming  the  law,  which  was  before  him" 
{Sura  V),  "Jesus  is  no  more  than  a  servant  whom  we  favoured,  and  proposed  as 
an  instance  of  divine  power  to  the  children  of  Israel"  {Sura  LXI).  This,  then, 
seems  to  show  that  the  Book  of  Melkin  dates  after  the  Arab  Conquest  in  641. 
The  phrase  "the  prophet  Jesus"  occurs  m  John  of  Glastonbury  in  the  story  of  the 
Soldan  and  the  captive  crusader  :  "  At  last  he  asked,  among  other  things,  if  he  had 
itnowledge  of  a  certain  island,  situated  between  two  mountains,  where  rests  Joseph 
ab  Arimathia,  the  noble  dccurion,  who  took  down  the  prophet  Jesus  from  the  cross." 
Here  the  epithet  is  quite  rightly  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  Mahomedan,  and  shows 
that  in  the  previous  quotations  the  epithet  has  been  derived,  possibly  with  the  rest 
of  the  story,  from  an  original  in  which  Mahomedan  influence  occurs. 

Reviewing  the  whole  question  of  dating,  it  is  very  clear  that  we  have  here 
a  collection  of  stories  and  legends  of  various  periods  ;  of  which  some,  such  as  the 
story  of  Pompey  and  the  pirate,  date  to  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  ; 
some,  as  the  account  of  the  Persian  king's  conversion,  to  the  seventh  century.  The 
form  in  which  the  story  is  cast  is,  in  its  discursiveness  and  piety,  closely  allied  to 
Arabic  literature ;  many  of  the  names  are  Arabic ;  and  if,  as  seems  possible,  the 
name  of  the  whole  collection  of  stories  was  the  Book  of  Melkin,  then  they  must 
have  been  originally  written  in  Arabic,  the  Arabic  name  being  retained  when  the 
manuscript  was  translated  into  Latin,  though  its  meaning  was  lost  by  later  copyists. 
This  would  mean  that  the  date  must  be  after  the  rise  of  Mahomedan  power  in  the 
seventh  century,  but  a  limit  to  a  late  date  is  set  by  the  mention  of  Melkin  in 
Asser's  Life  of  Alfred.  Therefore  the  date  of  the  Book  of  Melkin  lies  between  the 
latter  half  of  the  seventh  century  and  the  earlier  half  of  the  ninth.  This  would 
bring  it  to  the  eighth  century,  a  very  likely  date  in  view  of  the  fact  that,  according 
to  Wolfram,  there  was  an  Arabic  original  for  his  version  of  the  legend.  The 
Moorish  conquest  of  Spain  took  place  early  in  the  eighth  century,  after  which 
Arabic  manuscripts  must  have  come  into  Europe.  If  then  there  were,  besides, 
a  tradition,  or  possibly  even  a  record,  of  early  Eastern  connections  at  Glastonbury, 
the  Arabic  manuscript  there  would  naturally  be  supposed  to  refer  to,  and  to  be 
a  legacy  from,  the  early  period.  But  that  the  early  part  of  the  eighth  century  was 
the  date  at  which  the  Grail  legend,  in  its  connection  with  Joseph  of  Arimathaea, 
began  to  be  current  is  shown  by  a  statement  in  Helinand's  Chronicle  under  the 
year  720.  "At  this  time  a  certain  marvellous  vision  was  revealed  to  a  certain 
hermit  in  Britain  concerning  St.  Joseph,  the  decurion  who  took  down  from  the 
cross  the  body  of  our  Lord,  as  well  as  the  dish  in  which  our  Lord  supped  with  his 
disciples,  whereof  the  history  was  written  out  by  the  said  hermit  and  is  called 
Of  the  Graal."  The  eighth  century  is  also  given  as  the  date  of  the  hermit's  vision 
in  de  Borron's  Joseph.  "  II  auint  apres  la  passion  ihesu  crist  .  vij.  cens  &  .  xvij. 
ans  ke  ie,  li  plus  pechieres  des  autres  pecheours,  me  gisoie  en  .  j  .  petit  habitacle 
endroit  ichele  cure  ki  est  apielee  la  tierche  vigile  de  la  nuit"  (Lovelich,  //isi.  of 
Holy  prail,  Early  Eng.  Text  Soc,  XX,  p.  4).  This  is  also  very  nearly  the  date 
"  of '  seaven  hundred  and  eleaven '  when  the  Constantinopolitan  Prince  "  Congar 
came  to  Congresbury  in  Somersetshire,  and  there  planted  his  staff,  which  grew  into 
a  tree. 

In  the  eleventh  century  much  of  the  dogmatic  portions  must  have  been  added ; 
but  whether  the  additions  were  made  in  the  Latin  or  were  the  work  of  the  French 
translator  there  is  nothing  to  show. 

I  am  well  aware  that  in  the  foregoing  essay  there  are  many  debatable  points 
which  require  more  study  ;  but,  in  spite  of  these  I  think  I  have  proved  the  point 


I 


The  Egyptian  Eleinents  in  the  Grail  Romance.  69 

which  I  set  out  to  prove,  namely,  that  that  portion  of  the  Grail  Romance,  which 
relates  to  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  is  Egyptian  in  origin. 

ApPENDlXh— The  quotation  from  the  Book  of  Melkin  which  is  given  by 
John  of  Glastonbury,  ed.  Heame,  1726  : 

"  Insula  Avallonis  avida  funere  paganorum,  prae  ceteris  in  orbe  ad  sepulturam 
eorum  omnium  sperulis  propheciae  vaticinantibus  decorata,  et  in  futurum  ornata 
erit  altissimum  laudantibus.  Abbadare,  potens  in  Saphat,  paganorum  nobilissimus, 
cum  centum  quatuor  milibus  dormicionem  ibi  accepit.  Inter  quos  Joseph  de 
marmore,  ab  Arimathia  nomine,  cepit  sompnum  perpetuum ;  et  jacet  in  linea 
bifurcata,  juxta  meridianum  angulum  oratorii,  cratibus  praeparatis,  super  potentem 
adorandum  virginem,  supradictis  sperulatis  (or  speculatis)  locum  habitantibus 
tredecim.  Habet  enim  secum  Joseph  in  sarcophago  duo  fassula  alba  et  argentea, 
cruore  prophetae  Ihesu  et  sudore  perimpleta.  Cum  reperietur  ejus  sarcophagum 
integrum  illibatum,  in  futuris  videbitur,  et  erit  apertum  toto  orbi  terrarum.  Ex 
tunc  nee  aqua,  nee  ros  coeli,  insulam  nobilissimam  habitantibus  poterit  deficere. 
Per  multum  tempus  ante  diem  judicialem  in  Josaphat  erunt  aperta  haec,  et  viventibus 
declarata.     Hue  usque  Melkinus." 

This  statement  occurs  twice.  On  p.  30  it  is  preceded  by :  "  Unde  quidem 
Britonum  vates,  nomine  Melkinus,  ita  exorsus  est";  and  on  p.  55  by:  "  Ista 
scriptura  invenitur  in  libro  Melkini,  qui  fuit  ante  Merlinum." 

M.  A.  Murray. 


E  3 


(     70    ) 


THE   QUEENLY    TITLE,   XXIiND   DYNASTY. 

There  has  been  much  confusion  between  various  princesses  and  queens  of  the 
XXIInd  dynasty,  owing  to  a  close  similarity  of  their  names.     As  it  is  very  unlikely 
that  half  a  dozen  different  queens  should  all  have  the  same  name,  the  repetition 
suggests  that  this  is  rather  an  epithet,  or  title,  than  a  name. 
The  various  forms  are  : — 

Sheshenq  I,  wife,  M.S.,  XXXI U  -=>  °    k    "     '^ 

Usarken  I,  wife,  L.A.,  XV;  A.B.,  XIII  O  U      P  ^ 

Takerat  I, wife,  L.D.,  256-7,  P.R.,  39   ...  U   ^  ^=  - :  ^=  0 

A.Z.,  XXXIV,  iii         ...  U   T'  -^-n  ^=  0 

Usarken    II,    wife,    N.B.,     52  ;     Scarab  | j   "^y^  e  / a 

Rec,  XXII,  131  U   "^  °  k'*     ^ 

Usarken  II,  daughter,  N.B.,  52 |J   *=p*  .^ o  ,c^l    q 

Takerat  II,  daughter,  L.K.,  606  ...       -^     \ )   <:=>  a  / a     o 

Unplaced     L.D.,  256,  <5,  <:    ...  \_J   '^-p'  o  / d 

L.D.,  256,/ir    -  U'^i^  '  '= 

L.D.,  256, /^        ...  (_J  "^  I - I  I D 

A.S.,  IV,  1S3-6...  U  -^  — ^    ^ 

At  that  age  '^'-•^  was  sounded  as  ri  or  riya^  hence  the  word  here  spelt  out 

was  Karimat  or  Karimot. 

Thus  the  regular  title  of  a  princess  or  queen  of  the  Shishaks  was  the  same  as 
the  Arabic  for  a  princess,  Iaj^,  kerimat.  Originally  meaning  the  "generous," 
and  hence  the  "  noble  "  or  "  gracious  one,"  from  kerim,  it  is  the  epithet  for  a  princess, 
still  maintained  in  Turkish  use,  and  has  now  become  the  usual  polite  word  for 
a  daughter  in  Egypt. 

How  a  Semitic  epithet  should  come  into  regular  use  in  an  Egyptian  dynasty, 
is  obvious  when  we  recognise  the  origin  of  the  name  Sheshenq.  Shushanqu,  "  the 
man  of  Susa,"  coming  from  Semitic  Babylonia,  naturally  kept  a  familiar  title  of 
his  home  for  the  princesses  of  the  family. 

W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 


(     71     ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Zeitschrift  fi'ir  Aegypfische  Sprache,  LI  I,  19 15. 

SCHAFER,    H. — Einiges  ueber  EntsteJmng  unci  Art  der  Aegyptischen  Kunst. 
Prof.  Schafer  has  written  a  long  and  sympathetic  article  on  Egyptian  art.     He 
shows  that  the  prehistoric  reliefs, — which  are  so  unlike  anything  that  comes  later 
as  to  have  been  set  down  as  foreign   by  even  trained  observers, — are  really  the 
first  examples  of  Egyptian  art  from  which  the  later  characteristics  develop.     He 
instances  the  Paris  slate-palette  with  the  bull  as  the  principal  example  of  the  early 
art,  and  compares  it  with  the  palette  of  Narmer,  later  in  date,  and  combining  the 
characteristics  of  archaic  art  with  some  of  the  forms  of  the  "  typical "  Egyptian  art. 
He  then  proceeds  to  argue  that  true  Egyptian  art  really  comes  into  being  about 
the  Ilnd  or  Hlrd  dynasty ;  and  that  from  that  period  down  to  the  Ptolemaic  era, 
all  works  of  pure  Egyptian  art  have  .something  in  common  which  differentiates 
them  from  the  work  of  other  nations,  so  much  so  that  anyone,  with  only  a  small 
amount  of  expert  knowledge,  could  identify  a  piece  of  Egyptian  sculpture  even 
though  found  in  the  heart  of  Babylonia.     Yet  the  early  Egyptian  reliefs  are  not 
unlike  those  of  ancient  Babylonia  and  Assyria.     Thus  in  Egypt,  on  a  slate  palette, 
there  is  a  scene  of  a  battlefield,  full  of  vivid  and  ghastly  detail,  like  the  vulture- 
stela  of  Babylonia  and  the  Assyrian  representations.     But  when  the  art  is  fully 
developed  there  is  no  resemblance.     In  the  battle-scenes  of  the  Assyro-Babylonian 
sculpture  we  can  almost  hear  the  rumbling  of  the  heavy  wagons  and  the  thunder  of 
the  hoofs :  we  feel  with  the  soldiers  the  toil  and  labour  of  their  profession.     In  the 
Egyptian  representations,  the  light  chariot  of  the  son  of  the  god  flies  over  the  field 
of  battle,  while  he  casts  down  in  great  swathes  the  enemy  who  fly  like  sparrows 
before  a  hawk  :  it  is  the  very  poetry  of  the  battlefield.     Thus  the  Assyrian  excelled 
in  the  expression  of  force,  which  is  apt  to  give  the  impression  of  gloom  and  ferocity, 
while  the  Egyptian  art  developed  a  symmetry  and  humanity,  an  expression  of  an 
inward  greatness,  to  which  the  Assyrian  never  attained.     In  all  art  there  is  a 
continual  battle  between  the  creative  and  the  imitative,  and  the  problem   is  to 
combine  two  forces  .so  utterly  opposed.     No  artist,  no  period,  can  offer  a  solution 
which  will  avail  for  other  artists  and  other  periods,  but  the  Egyptian  obtained 
a  .solution  of  a  kind.     Taken  altogether  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  in  all 
antiquity  there  are  no  other  people,  except  the  Greeks,  who  so  deserve  the  name  of 
artists  as  the  Egyptians.     Prof  Schafer  sets  the  highest  point  of  development  in  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  for  there  we  have  the  most  varied  material,  and  art  is  so  much  a 
principle  of  the  life  of  the  entire  nation  that  it  penetrates  everywhere,  and  in  the  hands 
of  the  artist  everything  takes  on  an  artistic  form,  down  to  the  implements  of  daily 
life.     The  foundation  of  the  character  of  Egyptian  art  was  laid  in  the  Ilnd  and 
Ilird  dynasties,  and  it  is  advisable  to  glance  at  the  extraordinary  creative  power  of 
the  new  forces  then  brought  into  play.     The  Paris  slate-palette  shows,  particularly 
by  the  treatment  of  the  muscles  of  the  head  and  legs,  that  the  archaic  art  was  on 
the  way  to  becoming  fossilised.     We  see  the  remains  of  it  in  the  reliefs  on  the 
throne  of  the  Khafra  statue,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  rest  of  that  statue 
if  one  is  ignorant  of  archaic  work.     The  new  art  then  was  a  return  to  nature  and 

E   4 


72  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache. 

simplicity.  And  it  is  at  this  time  also  that  the  sublimely  simple  architectural  form, 
the  four-sided  pyramid,  originated.  We  have  been  told  that  this  form  is  primitive 
and  naturalistic,  because  theoretically  so  simple,  and  that  it  was  derived  from  the 
shape  of  a  heap  of  stones ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  the  result  of  centuries  of 
experiment  on  closely  allied  forms.  Prof  Schafer  contends  that  the  priesthood  had 
little  or  no  influence  on  art,  except  where  it  pertained  to  the  temples  only.  Even 
the  reaction  after  the  death  of  Akhenaten  was  due,  not  to  the  priests,  but  to  the 
natural  reaction  of  artists  from  an  art  which  was  degenerating  into  caricature. 
Far  greater  than  the  influence  of  the  priests  was  that  of  the  king.  Under  a  strong 
ruler,  prosperity,  and  with  it  all  the  arts  of  life,  flourished  in  Egypt ;  and  seeing 
what  an  extraordinary  concentration  of  power  was  in  the  king's  hands,  it  is  not 
wonderful  that  his  likes  and  dislikes  can  be  observed  in  the  art.  It  is  not  for 
nothing  that  the  Egyptian  architects  and  artists  say,  in  their  own  biographical 
inscriptions,  that  they  had  been  educated  by  the  king,  or  had  received  their 
instruction  from  him.  Therefore  we  may  speak  of  a  style  of  Thothmes  or  of 
Rameses,  just  as  we  speak  of  a  style  of  Louis  XIV.  One  very  remarkable  e.xample 
of  the  personal  relation  of  the  king  with  art  is  found  at  certain  times,  as  under 
Amenhotep  III  and  IV,  when  the  lineaments  of  the  king  are  blended  with  those  of 
his  subjects.  Although  Egyptian  history  covers  a  long  period  of  time,  the  art 
follows  a  normal  course  of  development.  First,  a  long  period  in  which  there  is 
hardly  any  art  worth  the  name  ;  then  a  period  of  archaic  art,  which  has  often  great 
charm.  At  the  end  of  this  archaic  period,  a  few  generations  of  artists,  favoured  by 
circumstances,  reach  a  height,  which  is  never  surpassed  later.  Their  works  establish, 
at  one  stroke,  the  rank  of  that  nation  in  the  artistic  history  of  mankind.  That 
nation  has  found  its  artistic  speech.  All  later  art  is  then  merely  the  consolidation 
of  the  ground  thus  taken  by  assault.  The  artist  refines  his  mediums  more  and 
more,  he  learns  to  use  them  more  quickly,  and  discovers  new  methods  of  applying 
them,  but  the  works  of  the  great  creators  maintain  their  place  beside  these  late 
performances.  When  at  last  all  new  ways  have  been  tried  and  the  creative  power 
of  a  people  nears  its  end,  the  artist  turns  to  the  imitation  of  the  early  works  and 
reproduces  them,  till  by  degrees  the  power  is  utterly  extinguished,  and,  in  the  end, 
even  technical  dexterity  is  lost.  Three  other  high  points  can  be  distinguished  in 
the  art-history  of  Egypt :  the  Middle  Kingdom,  the  New  Kingdom,  and  the  Late 
Period.  Three  times,  therefore,  the  art,  with  unexampled  tenacity,  raised  itself  from 
decay,  for  it  is  not  true  that  the  history  of  Egyptian  art  shows  only  a  gradual  decay 
from  the  Old  Kingdom  onwards.  If,  then,  the  theory  is  accepted  that  certain 
definite  personalities  were  the  creators  of  Egyptian  art,  the  question  arises  as  to 
where  these  artists  worked.  Our  material  is  still  too  scanty  to  give  a  definite 
answer,  but  one  may  conjecture  that  it  was  Memphis,  whose  god  Ptah  was  very 
early  looked  upon  both  as  the  artist  of  the  gods,  and  as  the  patron  of  artists.  Who 
those  early  artists  were  it  is  impossible  to  say.  In  Egypt  art  has  always  been 
successfully  separated  from  the  individuality  of  the  artist ;  hardly  any  work  of  art 
is  eve'r  signed,  for  the  artist  looked  upon  himself,  not  always  to  the  advantage  of 
his  art,  more  as  a  member  of  a  great  corporation  than  as  an  individual  personality. 
It  is,  however,  worth  noting  that  in  the  Late  period,  there  was  good  historical 
knowledge  of  the  works  of  Imhetep,  the  architect  of  King  Zoser  of  the  Ilird  dynasty. 
In  Egypt,  as  elsewhere,  genius  could  express  itself  in  spite  of  all  hindrance,  and 
mediocrity  could  only  work  according  to  well-tested  rule  and  line,  which  thus 
develop  into  rigid  laws.  Mediocrity  can  always  be  raised  by  good  teaching  to 
a  high  level,  and  this  was  especially  the  case  in  Egypt.     It  is  these  mediocre  works 


Zeitschrift  fitr  Aegyplisclie  Sprache.  73 

which  flood  our  Museums,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  all  scholars  to  raise  the  great  works 
of  art  out  of  the  mass.  The  history  of  art  should  not  be  a  history  of  mediocrity. 
The  real  history  of  a  living  art  runs  always  in  a  narrow  line,  for  it  has  to  do  only 
with  the  best  peii(ormances  of  every  period. 

Klebs,  Luise. — Die  Tiefendimension  in  der  Zeicltnung  des  alien  Reiches. 
(14  illustrations  in  the  text).  Miss  Klebs  has  written  an  extraordinarily  interesting 
paper  on  the  methods  used  by  the  Egyptians  to  represent  depth  in  their  drawing. 
Of  perspective,  in  our  sense,  they  had  none ;  conceptions  such  as  the  point  of 
sight,  vanishing  points,  and  station  point,  were  entirely  foreign  to  them.  All  the 
objects  they  drew  were  in  silhouette,  and  they  represented,  for  example,  two  oxen 
walking  side  by  side,  as  a  silhouette  with  a  double  contour  on  one  side,  and  with  all 
the  feet  on  the  same  level.  In  all  drawing  the  difficulty  is  to  represent  an  object  of 
three  dimensions  on  a  surface  of  two  dimensions  ;  and  without  perspective  the  ground, 
whether  landscape  or  building,  is  taken  out  of  its  horizontal  position  and  set  up  on 
end  like  a  wall.  The  Egyptian  drew  in  this  manner,  arranging  his  scenes  in 
registers,  the  nearest  objects  being  in  the  lowest  register,  the  farthest  away  in  the 
highest.  The  first  great  step  in  advance  as  regards  perspective  is  to  represent  the 
apparent  diminution  of  objects  in  the  background,  and  there  is  plenty  of  evidence 
to  show  that  the  Egyptians  had  made  this  step.  Miss  Klebs'  paper  points  out  the 
working  of  the  Egyptian  idea  of  perspective  on  these  two  lines  :  i.  the  high  horizon 
with  distant  objects  at  the  top  of  the  picture  and  near  objects  at  the  bottom  ;  and 
2.  the  diminution  of  objects  at  a  distance.  Thus  a  whole  wall  may  represent 
a  complete  landscape;  in  the  foreground  is  the  Nile  with  boats;  in  the  next 
register,  i.e.,  farther  away,  is  a  swamp  with  clap-nets  for  birds  ;  in  a  still  higher 
register,  is  the  firm  ground  where  boats  are  built  and  fish  are  dried ;  in  the  top 
register,  showing  the  greatest  distance,  is  the  edge  of  the  desert  with  hunters 
following  game.  It  is  possible  to  find  many  examples  of  such  scenes,  in  which  all 
the  registers  belong  to  one  another  and  make  a  complete  picture.  The  difficulty  of 
representing  the  deceased  in  the  foreground  as  a  spectator  of  the  scenes  which  are 
primarily  for  his  delectation,  is  overcome  by  the  fact  that  everything  is  drawn  in 
profile,  so  that  by  placing  him  at  the  side  of  the  picture,  he  faces  the  other  figures. 
Remembering  that  the  position  of  an  object,  either  high  up  or  low  down  on  a  wall, 
represents  its  position  in  space,  it  is  easy  to  see  why  harvest  scenes  are  often 
represented  in  two  registers,  one  above  the  other,  rather  than  in  a  row  along  one 
register.  The  felled  tree  and  the  wine-press  scenes  are  well  explained  by 
Miss  Klebs.  She  goes  on  to  show  that  the  Egyptians  understood  the  apparent 
diminution  in  the  size  of  figures  at  a  distance  from  the  spectator.  Thus,  in  a  desert- 
hunt  gazelles  in  the  background  are  represented  smaller  than  those  in  the  foreground, 
and  in  the  wine-pressing  scene  the  fifth  man,  who  is  the  farthest  away  and  therefore 
drawn  higher  up  on  the  wall  than  the  others,  is  also  smaller  in  size.  In  the  same 
way  the  registers  decrease  in  size,  the  narrowest  being  at  the  top ;  and  as  the  figures 
are  drawn  in  proportion  the  larger  figures  are  at  the  bottom,  the  smaller  at  the  top. 
In  scenes  where  the  deceased  views  his  flocks  and  herds,  the  small  creatures,  such 
as  birds,  are  placed  in  the  lowest  register,  and  are  drawn  large,  as  being  nearest  to 
the  spectator ;  while  oxen  and  other  large  animals  are  placed  in  a  higher  register, 
and  are  proportionately  smaller  in  size.  A  knowledge  of  perspective  or  fore- 
shortening is  also  often  seen  in  representations  of  the  human  figure.  The  usual 
method  of  drawing  the  figure  was  a  profile  aspect  of  head  and  face,  the  upper  part 
of  the  body  in  front  view,  the  lower  part  of  the  body  in  a  position  half-way  between 


74  Zeitschrift  filr  Aegyptische  Sprache. 

the  front  view  of  the  trunk  and  the  profile  aspect  of  the  legs.  It  is  amazing  what 
variety  of  movement  the  draughtsman  managed  to  express  in  spite  of  these 
limitations.  Yet  there  are  many  examples  of  the  profile  aspect  of  the  body,  where 
the  line  of  the  shoulders  is  shortened  and  the  line  of  the  back  is  seen.  Single  limbs 
are  sometimes  shown  of  diminished  size,  as  when  a  man  sits  with  the  leg  which  is 
farthest  from  the  spectator,  drawn  up  against  his  body ;  though  here  the  Egyptian 
artist  succeeded  better  with  animals  than  with  the  human  figure.  The  Egyptian, 
however,  though  he  had  rightly  observed  the  apparent  diminution  of  objects  in  the 
depth  of  a  scene,  did  not  venture  to  apply  the  rule  to  a  stiff  inanimate  object,  which 
is  the  same  size  along  its  whole  length.  The  palpable  reality  of  the  size  of  such  an 
object  was  to  them  an  evidence  against  the  truth  of  its  apparent  diminution  ;  thus 
a  tree  or  a  pole  was  of  certain  height  from  top  to  bottom,  a  height  which  could  not 
be  diminished,  even  though  the  object  lay  on  the  ground  and  went  inwards  into  the 
picture.  "It  was  different  with  things  which  could  move,  with  animals  and  human 
beings,  who  can  stoop  and  squeeze  themselves  together,  stretch  out  a  leg  or  bend 
an  arm.  These  the  artist  dared  to  draw  as  he  saw  them.  He  possessed  a  sure 
feeling  for,  and  an  empirical  knowledge  of,  perspective,  but  had  drawn  no  conclusion 
from  his  use  of  the  diminution  of  objects,  and  had  adduced  no  law  of  perspective." 

Reisner,  G.  a. — Excavations  at  Kernia  {Dongola  Province).  6  plates. 
I.  The  first  report  gives  an  account  of  the  excavations  of  191 2-1 3.  The  description 
of  the  site  is  given  thus :  "  The  basin  falls  naturally  into  two  parts — eastern  and 
western— each  marked  by  a  large  mud-brick  structure,  called  locally  the  '  Upper 
Defufa' (the  eastern  one)  and  the  '  Lower  DefClfa'  (the  western  one).  We  began 
with  the  lower  or  western  Defilfa."  The  objects  discovered  around  the  DefClfa 
showed  "  a  dated  occupation  of  the  site  lasting  from  the  Vth  to  the  X  Vlth  dynasties 
.  .  .  the  site  of  a  considerable  town,  the  seat  of  a  garrison,  a  manufacturing  and 
trading  centre,  and  possibly  a  smelting  place  for  the  Um-en-Abadi  gold  mines." 
On  the  eastern  side  of  the  basin  are  a  great  number  of  stone  enclosures  noticed  by 
Lepsius  in  1844.  Two  of  these  enclosures  were  excavated,  one  measured  84  metres 
in  diameter  and  contained  66  graves.  These  were  all  multiple  burials,  the  chief 
body  being  that  of  a  male ;  the  subsidiary  bodies  were  so  arranged  as  to  indicate 
human  sacrifice,  and  their  positions  suggested  that  the  victims  had  been  buried 
alive.  The  other  enclosure  was  rectangular  and  contained  a  small  building  of  brick 
and  stone,  perhaps  a  temple.  The  walls  inside  were  painted  with  figures  of  animals. 
The  eastern  Defilfa  was  much  like  this  temple  in  character ;  just  outside  the  front 
door  was  found  an  inscription  on  stone  giving  the  date  of  the  33rd  year  of 
Amenemhat  III.  The  objects  found  in  the  graves  and  in  the  small  temple  are  of 
the  same  period,  the  time  of  the  Hyksos.  Though  the  scarabs,  alabaster  vases,  and 
coffins  are  Egyptian,  the  great  mass  of  objects  are  not  Egyptian.  Prof  Elliot  Smith 
adds  a  note  on  the  skull  of  a  man. 

\\.  The  second  report  is  on  the  excavations  of  191 3-14.  The  low  mounds  to 
the  east  of  the  eastern  Defflfa  were  excavated  ;  these  were  all  burial  tumuli  of  three 
main  types.  The  most  important  find  was  the  fragment  of  a  life-sized  statue  of 
that  Hepzefa,  whose  contracts  with  the  priests  of  the  temple  of  Siiit  are  so  well 
known.  His  tomb  was  one  of  those  which  contained  sacrificed  human  beings.  The 
cemetery  ranges  in  date  from  the  early  Xllth  dynasty  to  the  Hyksos  period  ;  and 
the  objects  found  were  of  Egyptian  as  well  as  of  local  manufacture.  The  eastern 
Defilfa  proved  to  be  a  temple,  the  western  DefQfa  a  fort.  (See  the  summary  of  the 
full  report  on  p.  86.) 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aeg)'ptische  Sprache.  75 

Naville,  E. — Le  grand  reservoir  d'Abydos  et  la  tombe  d' Osiris.  3  plates 
The  excavation  of  one  of  the  most  mysterious  buildings  in  Egypt  is  shortly 
described.  The  plan  shows  a  rectangular  hall  divided  by  two  rows  of  granite 
columns  ;  round  tife  sides  is  a  tank  for  water,  so  that  the  inner  part  of  the  hall  is  an 
island  ;  in  the  walls  are  small  cells,  originally  closed  by  two-leaved  doors  working 
on  pivots.  The  centre  cell,  at  the  end  nearest  the  temple,  is  pierced  to  form  a  door 
into  an  inner  hall,  into  which  there  was  no  other  entrance.  Prof  Naville's  conclusion 
is  that  the  great  main  hall,  built  of  enormous  blocks,  is  of  very  early  date,  as  early 
as  the  "temple  of  the  Sphinx,"  or  even  earlier;  but  that  the  reliefs  and  inscriptions 
were  sculptured  in  the  XlXth  dynasty  on  walls  which  up  to  then  had  been 
undecorated.  The  inner  hall,  however,  he  thinks  was  built  by  the  king  whose  name 
it  bears,  Sety  I.  He  considers  the  great  hall  to  be  Strabo's  Well,  though  noting 
that  Prof  Petrie  had  previously  suggested  this  identification.  He  also  accepts  the 
identification  of  the  building  with  the  cult  of  Osiris,  but  prefers  to  call  that  portion 
excavated  by  the  Egyptian  Research  Account  the  Menephtheum  rather  than  the 
Osireion. 


Sethe,  Y^.—Zur  Erkldning  einiger  Denkmaeler  aus  der  Fruhzeit  der 
aegyptiscJten  Kultur.  3  illustrations.  Prof.  Sethe  here  explains  some  obscure  points 
on  two  of  the  sculptured  slate  palettes.  The  first  of  these  palettes  has  on  one  side 
a  representation  of  six  fortresses  or  fortified  towns  being  destroyed  by  animals 
armed  with  the  -""^^i.  hoe.  These  fortresses  are  arranged  in  two  rows  :  in  the  upper, 
the  destroying  animal  is  a  hawk  over  the  first  fortress,  the  other  two  are  obliterated  ; 
in  the  lower  row,  from  right  to  left,  are  a  lion,  a  scorpion,  and  two  hawks  together. 
Prof  Sethe  argues  that  these  creatures  represent  the  king ;  thus  the  hawk,  which 
heads  the  first  row,  is  the  earliest  title  of  the  king,  and  always  stands  first  in  the 
titulary,  therefore  here  it  is  the  first  of  the  animals  ;  the  double  hawk  is  a  common 
title  of  the  king  in  the  1st  dynasty,  perhaps  as  the  embodiment  of  the  two  Horuses 
of  Hierakonpolis  and  Buto.  The  lion,  which  heads  the  second  row,  is  probably 
a  representation,  not  a  title,  of  the  king,  who  in  later  times  is  often  represented  as 
a  sphinx  and  is  frequently  called  "  Lion  of  the  Battlefield  "  and  "  Fierce  Lion." 
The  creature,  which  attacks  the  middle  fortress  of  the  lower  row,  is  a  scorpion. 
There  is  a  Scorpion-king  known  at  the  beginning  of  the  1st  dynasty,  a  predecessor 

of  Narmer  and  Aha,  who  is  identical  with  King  Ka,  for  the  sign  formerly  read  \ j 

is  now  found  to  be  the  cursive  writing  of  the  scorpion.  (This  is  impossible,  as  the 
sealing  and  the  incised  jars  certainly  read  ka^  Prof.  Sethe  therefore  sees  in  this 
palette  a  commemoration  of  a  victory  obtained  by  the  Scorpion-king.  The 
Reverse  side  of  the  palette  shows  three  registers  of  walking  animals,  and  below 
them  a  number  of  trees  and  shrubs;  Legge  has  recognised  in  these  the  booty  of 

a  victorious  king.     On  the  right  of  the  trees  is  a  bent  staff,    |,  stuck  into  a  pile  of 

earth.     This  is  really  the  ancient  name  of  Libya,  which,  in  the  Old  Kingdom  is 

written    |    O     and   reads    Thnw.     The   conclusion    is   that   one    side   shows   the 

destruction  of  the  Libyan  fortresses,  and  the  other  side  the  booty  brought  from  that 
country.  (This  was  pointed  out  by  Prof  Newberry,  in  Ancient  Egypt,  191 5,  p.  98.) 
The  second  palette  is  the  one  which  represents  a  battlefield  with  birds  of  prey 
devouring  the  dead.  In  the  middle  a  gigantic  lion  tears  an  enemy  to  pieces.  In 
this  lion  Prof  Sethe  sees  the  representation  of  the  king.  Above,  and  to  the  right, 
are  the  lower  parts  of  two  figures,  a  prisoner  with  bound  arms  being  driven  forward 


•jd  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptischc  Sprache. 

by  a  personage  in  a  long  garment,  perhaps  a  goddess.  In  front  of  the  captive  is 
a  peculiar  object,  which  Prof  Sethe  explains  as  the  name  of  a  country.     The  lower 

part  of  the  object  is  a  pile  of  earth,  precisely  like  the  pile  of  earth  in  which  |  stands 

in  the  other  palette,  and  therefore  equivalent  to  the  CZD  of  the  later  hieroglyphs. 
The  upper  part  of  the  object  appears  to  be  a  bundle  of  reeds,  but  what  sign  it 
represents  it  is  impossible  to  say  owing  to  its  present  broken  condition. 

Kees,  H. — Nachlese  zum  Opfertanz  des  aegyptischen  Koenigs.  2  plates  and 
3  illustrations.  This  paper,  as  its  name  implies,  gives  some  additional  examples  of 
the  sacred  dances.  The  Bird-running. — At  Karnak  there  is  a  further  example  of 
the  bird-running  of  Thothmes  III,  where  Bast  is  the  goddess;  and  another  of 
Rameses  II,  with  the  lion-headed  Urt-hekau  as  the  goddess.  In  the  Late  Period 
there  is  a  bird-running  of  Shabaka  usurped  by  Nectanebo  II,  and  there  is  one  of 
the  Ptolemaic  era  at  EdfO.  The  text  of  the  last  named  is  interesting  as  supple- 
menting the  text  at  Dendereh,  hitherto  the  only  one  known.  The  parallelism  of 
"image"  and  "ka"  shows  how  nearly  allied  these  conceptions  were  among  the 
Egyptians.  The  bird  is  not  a  common  offering  like  the  goose,  but  is  a  special 
offering  "  in  order  to  open  the  way."  The  new  text  makes  it  clear  that  the  bird 
was  the  "  image  "  of  the  divinity,  who  was  originally  Hathor.  The  Vase-running 
and  the  Oar-running. — There  are  numerous  examples  of  the  period  of  Sety  I  and 
Rameses  II,  in  which  one  sees  the  origin  of  the  faults  and  misunderstandings  of 
later  times.  The  Sedlteb-nmning. — An  important  example  is  the  representation  of 
Thothmes  III  at  Karnak,  for  it  shows  not  only  the  two  runnings,  one  for  Lower 
Egypt  and  one  for  Upper  Egypt,  but  also  the  return  in  the  midst  of  priests,  and 
the  enthronement.  The  throne  scene  evidently  occurs  after  the  running  ;  the  king 
resumes  the  festival  robes  which  he  laid  aside  for  the  running,  and  is  enthroned 
while  sacrifices  are  offered  to  the  god,  to  whom  the  running  is  made,  Upuaut,  Lord 
of  the  Two  Lands.  We  meet  here  the  same  idea  that  is  found  in  the  coronation, 
the  5^^-festival,  and  other  ceremonies.  The  god,  here  according  to  ancient  custom 
Upuaut,  leads  the  king  to  the  throne,  gives  him  dominion,  for  which  he  receives 
sacrifices  as  a  thank-offering  from  the  king  through  the  j^w-priest. 

Scil.\EFER,  H. — Kunstwerke  atts  der  Zeit  Amenophis  IV.  26  illustrations. 
Prof  Schaefer  divides  this  paper  into  two  parts ;  in  the  first  he  deals  with  the 
examples  of  Tell  el-Amarna  sculpture  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum  ;  in  the  second 
with  the  sculpture  found  in  a  Tell  el-Amarna  sculptor's  studio  during  the  recent 
excavations.  As  an  admirer  of  Akhenaten  Prof  Schaefer  looks  upon  that  king 
not  only  as  a  great  reformer,  but  also  as  a  great  artist,  and  instances  the  Hymn  to 
the  Aten  to  prove  the  point.  He  thinks  also  that  Akhenaten,  or  Amenophis  IV  as 
he  prefers  to  call  him,  "  manifestly  possessed  a  lively  and  cultivated  aesthetic  sense 
and  he  appears  to  have  found  soon  a  master-sculptor  whose  works  and  ideas  were 
congenial  to  his  lord."  The  well-known  wooden  head  of  a  queen  is  definitely 
stated  by  Prof.  Schaefer  to  be  a  portrait  of  Queen  Tyi ;  the  long  chin  and  the 
haughty  mouth  being  quite  recognisable.  The  beautiful  head  of  a  child  princess  is 
well  known  as  one  of  the  best  pieces  of  the  period.  The  chief  interest  of  the  paper 
lies  in  the  examples  from  the  studio  of  the  sculptor  Thothmes.  When  the  town 
was  deserted  after  the  death  of  the  king  and  the  downfall  of  his  reformation,  the 
works  of  art — which,  more  than  anything  else,  bore  the  impress  of  Akhenaten's 
personality — were  abandoned  as  utterly  useless,  and  the  sculptor's  workshop  was 


Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  yj 

left  full  of  pieces  of  the  greatest  interest.  Of  these  by  far  the  finest  is  the  limestone 
statuette  of  the  queen.  The  exquisite  face  with  the  pathetic  childlike  mouth  shows 
how  appropriate  was  her  name  Nefert-ythi,  Beauty  comes.  The  statuette  ranks  as 
one  of  the  masterpieces  of  Egyptian  art.  Other  fine  pieces  are  the  head  of 
Akhenaten  in  limestone,  part  of  the  figure  of  a  princess  in  sandstone,  and  a  head  of 
another  princess.  A  great  number  of  plaster  casts  were  also  found.  Prof  Schaefer 
shows  that  plaster-casting  had  a  great  effect  on  the  art,  and  that  it  was  not  a  new 
thing  at  this  period,  but  had  probably  been  in  use  since  the  Middle  Kingdom  at 
least. 

MORET,  A. — Serdab  et  maison  du  Ka.     M.  Moret  states  a  theory  founded  on 

an    inscription     i^^  I  o  ftra  — fl-^  '^-=?-  I  <=:=»  «::— ^  ''sl  Ld    ^ discovered    in    the 

serdab  of  a  IVth  dynasty  tomb  near  the  Great  Pyramid.  The  reading  of  the 
inscription  should  be  "The  two  eyes  of  the  ka-house  of  Ra-ur."  He  rejects  the  idea 
^s=  can  mean,  like  the  French  regard,  both  g/ance  and  ivindow,  and  that  therefore 
the  inscription  refers  to  the  opening  from  the  serdab  into  the  tomb  chapel,  the 
serdab  being  then  designated  House  of  the  Ka.  He  considers  that  =3:1®=  means  the 
serdab  itself.  Thus  the  two  eyes  are  represented  over  the  false  doors  of  the  Old 
Kingdom,  and  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  on  the  left  side  of  coffins  and  sarcophagi 
at  the  height  of  the  eyes  of  the  mummy  inside  the  coffin.  In  both  cases  the  eyes 
show  the  place  where  the  eyes  of  the  dead  open  to  look  upon  the  world  of  the 
living  ;  the  mummy  in  the  sarcophagus,  the  statue  in  the  serdab  behind  the  false 
door. 

Erman,  a. — Saitische  Kopien  aus  Deir  el-Bahri.  Ever  since  N.  de  G.  Davics 
pointed  out  that  the  scenes  in  the  Theban  tomb  of  Aba  were  copied  from  the 
ancient  tomb  of  Aba  at  Deir  el-Gebrawi,  similar  cases  of  copying  by  Saitic  artists 
have  been  sought  for.  There  is  one  very  clear  case  which  has  not  been  noticed, 
though  the  original  and  the  copy  are  both  well  known  and  are  situated  close 
together.  This  is  the  tomb  of  Ment-em-hat,  in  which  the  scenes  of  sacrifice  have 
been  borrowed  from  the  temple  of  Deir  el-Bahri.  In  the  hall  of  sacrifice,  on  the 
south  side  of  the  upper  terrace  of  the  temple,  there  are  nine  scenes  of  sacrifice 
arranged  in  three  rows  on  each  side  of  the  door  (Plate  CVII  of  Naville's  publication). 
The  copyist  could  not  use  them  in  this  order  owing  to  exigencies  of  space,  as  he 
had  room  for  only  eight  scenes  ;  so  he  has  left  out  both  times  the  third  scene  of  the 
middle  row.  He  has  so  re-arranged  the  scenes  that  the  lowest  row  of  his  original 
is  placed  first,  the  highest  last,  showing  that  he  viewed  the  pictures  from  below 
upwards.  But  these  alterations  are  obviously  due  only  to  considerations  of  space  ; 
otherwise  he  has  copied  the  scenes  with  such  slavish  fidelity  that  the  representations 
and  scenes  of  the  original  can  be  accurately  reproduced.  It  is  therefore  quite 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  other  scenes  in  this  tomb  may  have  been  copied  from 
those  parts  of  the  temple  which  are  now  destroyed.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that 
the  inscription  over  the  offering  bearers  in  the  tomb- of  Ment-em-hat  are  practically 
the  same  as  in  the  tomb  of  Aba ;  even  the  orthography  is  the  same.  Such  a 
coincidence  can  hardly  be  accidental  ;  the  sculptors  of  both  tombs  must  have  copied 
from  the  same  original,  for  we  find  that  the  artist  of  Aba's  tomb  has  borrowed  from 
Deir  el-Bahri  when  his  original  at  Deir  el-Gebawi  failed  him.  Copying  from  an 
ancient  original  is  found  throughout  Egyptian  history ;  the  scenes  of  offering 
bearers  are  copied  from  earlier  scenes:  even  the  great  text  of  the  generation  and 


78  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache. 

exaltation  of  Hatshepsut  are  recognisable,  by  the  language  and  spelling,  as  coming 
from  a  much  earlier  time.  We  have  part  of  a  similar  inscription  (JJrkunden,  IV,  258) 
which,  though  dating  to  the  Xllth  dynasty,  cannot  have  been  even  then  the  original 
source. 

SCHAEKER,  H. — Die  Vokallosigkeit  des  " phoenizischen"  Alphabets.  Professor 
Schaefer  argues  that  picture  writing  among  a  Semitic  speaking  people  develops 
into  a  vowelless  script.  A  non-Semitic  language  does  not  produce  a  writing 
without  vowels.  As  no  picture  writing  is  known  as  the  immediate  precursor  of  the 
Phoenician  alphabet,  he  suggests  that  we  shall  find  the  most  influential  factor  in 
the  development  of  the  Phoenician  script  in  some  of  the  neighbouring  countries. 
He  rules  out  the  Cretan  and  Hittite,  for,  from  what  we  know  of  them,  vowels 
played  a  great  part  in  those  languages.  In  Babylonia- Assyria  a  picture-language 
is  developed  into  a  script  by  the  Sumerians,  a  non-Semitic  people;  therefore,  though 
used  later  by  a  Semitic  people,  it  retains  the  use  of  vowels.  The  Egyptian  then 
is  the  only  language  which  has  the  necessary  qualifications  to  influence  what 
Prof  Schaefer  calls  the  "  inner  form  "  of  the  Phoenician  alphabet ;  for,  as  he  points 
out,  there  is  historical  evidence  to  show  that  the  inner  and  outer  forms  of  a  script 
can  derive  from  different  sources. 


.Schaefer,  H. — Koenig  Huni.  The  point  which  Prof.  Schaefer  wishes  to 
make  is  that  in  writing  this  name  the  scribes  of  the  Prisse  Papyrus,  the  Turin 
Papyrus,  and  the  Sakkara  List  of  Kings,  knew  what  they  were  about.     He  calls 


attention  to  the  fact  that  the  verb   9  *^  hivy  has  another  form   9  *^  hwny 

Therefore  the  king's  name  may  be  written  rightly  with  either  form. 

Schaefer,  H. — Zwei  HeldcJitaten  des  Ahtnase,  des  Sohnes  des  Ebene  aus 
Elkab.  This  interesting  commentary  is  on  two  points  in  the  warlike  deeds  of 
Aahmes,  the  son  of  Abana.  The  first  deed  is  thus  translated  by  Breasted  :  "  One 
fought  in  this  Egypt,  south  of  this  city.  Then  I  brought  away  a  living  captive, 
a  man  ;  I  descended  into  the  water.  Behold,  he  was  brought  as  a  seizure  upon  the 
road  of  this  city  (although)  I  crossed  with  him  over  the  water.  It  was  announced 
to  the  royal  herald.  Then  one  presented  me  with  gold  in  double  measure."  It 
was   evidently   considered   something  unusual  as  the  capture  is  given  in  detail. 

Prof.  Schaefer  takes  "  this  city  "  to  refer  to  Avaris,  and  then  points  out  that  ^^ , 

which  Breasted  translates  Road  has  also  the  meaning  Side  ;  the  translation  would 
then  run  :  "  I  brought  in  a  living  captive,  a  man.  I  went  into  the  water ;  he  was 
seized  (by  me)  beside  the  city,  I  went  (back)  with  him  across  the  water.  It  was 
reported  to  the  royal  herald."  It  appears  then  that  the  city  lay  on  one  side  of  the 
river,  the  Egyptian  legions  either  on  the  other  side  or  in  boats  on  the  stream. 
Aahrnes  courageously  swam  to  the  enemy's  shore,  seized  one  of  the  hostile  warriors, 
and  dragged  him,  in  the  face  of  the  foe,  through  the  water  back  amongst  the 
Egyptian  forces.  The  king  obviously  recognised  the  valour  of  the  deed  by 
presenting  a  double  reward.     The  second  heroic  act  was  in  the  naval  action  against 

the  rebel  ^^  ^^  c^  ^^  \—J\  ^b  >  ^"^  ^'^^  °f  the  same  character  as  the  first. 

"  I  brought  two  warriors,  captured  from  the  ship  of  Aata."  Here  again  he  carried 
off  his  captives  out  of  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  and  the  reward  was  again  unusual. 


Zeitschrift  fi'ir  Aegyptische  Sprache.  79 

Prof.  Schaefer  adds  another  interesting  interpretation  of  this  inscription.  The 
narrative  portion  begins  with  Sf    ^     \  '    ^  '~~  ^^^^^  a  'j      """^  4"  ®  J rJ  V 

l\^^^^\^^^M  r^iJc^l  ^  •     One  would  naturally 

expect  here  a  sentence  like  :  "  I  was  born  in  the  town  of  El  Kab,"  and  that  this  is 
the  actual  meaning  is  almost  proved  by  the  sentence  which  follows  immediately  : 
"  While  my  father  was  an  officer  of  King  Seqenen-Ra."  In  fact,  "  I  made  my 
forms  "  is  merely  a  high-flown  way  of  saying  "  I  was  born,"  for  in  rmt  "  as  a  man  " 
is  to  be  understood.     In  this  connection  the  superscriptions  of  certain  passages  in 

the  Book  of  the  Dead  are  made  clearer.     Here  the  expression 


o    W   I  1 
is  translated  "  To  make  transformation  into."     Although  this  translation  is  quite 

possible,   it  must   be   remembered  that  a  word  does  not  always  have  the  same 

meaning  on  every  occasion.     We  see  that  in  the  Aahmes  inscription  it  can  mean, 

"  To  be  born,"  and  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  it  may  well  bear  the  same  meaning. 

This  is  perhaps  the  true  explanation  of  the  famous  remark  of  Herodotus  concerning 

the  transmigration  of  souls. 

Grapow,  H. — Zujei  Fragmente  einer  Handschrift  des  Nilhymnus  in  Turin. 
These  two  fragments  found  in  the  Turin  Museum  are  supplementary  to  the  already 
well-known  texts  of  the  Hymn  to  the  Nile,  and  will  be  of  interest  to  scholars. 

Erman,  a. — Die  Bedeutung  der  Adjectiva  auf-j.  This  is  an  important  paper 
grammatically.     It  deals  with  the  adjectives  derived  from  prepositions,  and  points 

out  that  this  form  can  often  be  translated  as  a  relative.     This  hU  V\    aaa~«,  which 

means  "  List  of  names,"  is  literally  "  That  in  which  his  name  is  "  ;  J[-  "  He  in 

whom  are  eyes";  ^^  «==>,  which  is  the  abbreviated  form  of  -^^  ,  "He  in 
whom  is  the  mouth,"  i.e.,  he  who  speaks  and  commands.  The  form  "'^^  "Belonging 
to  "  can  be  translated  in  the  same  way :    ^  ^  O  r^^   "I  who  belong  to  Ra." 


Peet,  T.  E. — Can  ^;;^  be  used  to  negative  simtf?     In  this  paper  Mr.  Peet 

points  out  that  the  sdtn tf  iorm  is  not  "  a  mere  variant  for  the  infinitive  to  be  used 

when  there  is  a  change  of  subject,"  and  he  therefore  argues  that  Blackman's  view 
of  the  use  of  '^;;j^  with  sdmtf  is  not  tenable. 

Sethe,  K. — Das  perfektische  Hilfsverbunt  w\lt  in  Demotischen  und  Koptischen. 
This  is  a  discussion  on  the  origin  of  the  form  a?  which  is  found  in  relative  sentences 
in  Akhmimic,  eT-A2CtoTU,  "  who  heard." 

Calice,  Graf  Y.—Das  Wort  %\  "T^  ^  .  This  word  is  generally  translated 
"  Infantry  officer,"  but  it  could  be  translated  "  Foot  soldier."  It  may  well  be  the 
Notnen  unitatis  of  the  collective  2^(1(1  ^  "^ ,  "Troop."     The  root  meaning  of 

-^  I—    —/I    II  Ml 

^^^  is  not  only  "To  inherit,"  but  "  To  be  rewarded,  to  be  enfeoffed,"  so  that 
a  soldier  is  "  he  who  is  rewarded  a  liege  man,"  "^  "^  ^ .     Though  this  translation 


8o  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprac/te. 

holds  good  in  many  texts,  it  must  be  remembered  that   y    ^g    ^  often  appears  as 

a  parallel  with  ^^^^^  ,  when  snnj>  means  "  Officer  of  the  chariotry."     But  snny 

is  more  probably  the  chariot  soldier,  and  not  the  officer.  The  conclusion  is  that 
the  word  means  "  Soldier,"  used  of  all  grades  in  the  same  way  that  we  ourselves 
use  it.  , 

HOEHNE,  G. — Drei  Koptisch-saidische  Tcxte  aus  der  Koeniglichen  Bibliothek 
zu  Berlin.  These  three  fragments  are  :  i,  a  biography  of  Pachom  of  Tabenese  ; 
2,  a  sermon  ;  3,  speeches  of  Jesus  to  his  mother.  The  first  gives  the  story  of  the 
crocodile  which  surprised  Pachom  and  his  brother  lohannes  on  the  banks  of  the 
Nile ;  the  second  is  a  denunciation  of  a  heretic  ;  the  third  is  a  fragment  of  an 
adoration  of  the  Virgin. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 

Sethe,  K. — The  dating  of  the  inscriptions  of  K  cx  ,  son  of  y  (1  [  o  tSr ,  the 
chieftain  of  Hermonthis,  can  be  accurately  fixed  by  the  example  now  in  London,  in 
which  occurs  the  group  ^37.  This  can  only  be  the  throne  name  of  Mentuhetep  III 
written  without  the  cartouche. 

Sethe,  K.— This  is  a  short  discussion  on  the  derivation  of  the  Greek  Bto? 
airpoaKopo^  from  the  Egyptian  T"  1   or  TTII^,  with  the  meaning  "  Immortal  life." 

CalicE,  Graf  F. — The  word  for  "  bed  "  or  "angareb"  is  fi oil  n  s.^^,  and 

it  is  found  in  an  inventory  of  a  peasant  or  artizan's  house,  showing  that,  like  the 
angareb  in  Nubia,  it  was  an  indispensable  piece  or  household  furniture. 

WiESMANN,  H. — The  combination  of  peq-  with  the  qualitative  is  very  rare, 
but  in  addition  to  pequtooTT  and  its  dialectical  variants  only  two  other  examples 
are  known,  peqBHja,  and  the  one  now  brought  forward  peqsup. 


WiESMANN,  H. — This,  an  interesting  note  on  the  origin  of  the  word  adobe, 
which  means  an  unburnt  brick  dried  in  the  sun.     It  derives  from  the  Egyptian 

J  '  ana 

Arabic  it  passed  into  Spanish,  thence  it  was  carried  to  Mexico,  and  finally  was 

adopted,  still  keeping  its  ancient  meaning,  into  the  modern  speech  of  America. 


or  '^N^^    1        ,  which  becomes  in  Coptic  TCOBe,  in  Arabic  ^—iie-     From 


I 


(     81     ) 

REVIEWS. 


^ 


Early  Egyptian  Records  of  Travel. — By  David  Paton.  Vol.  I,  4to,  90  pp. 
32.f.  ()d.     191 5.     (Princeton  University  Press,  Oxford  University  Press.) 

This  is  one  of  the  carefully  detailed  books  of  reference,  which  we  begin  to 
expect  from  American  scholarship. 

The  first  volume  covers  the  whole  of  the  period  from  the  beginning  of  the 
1st  dynasty  to  the  end  of  the  XVI Ith.  It  aims  at  being  exhaustive  by  giving 
a  reference  to  every  mention  of  a  foreign  country  in  any  text  of  that  early  period. 
The  texts  are  not  all  given  in  full,  but  in  every  case  sufficient  is  quoted  to  make 
the  quotation  perfectly  intelligible. 

The  book  is  not  printed,  but  typed,  and  the  typed  sheets  photographed  ;  on 
looking  at  the  elaborate  tables  the  reader  fully  endorses  the  appreciation,  which 
the  author  bestows  on  Mr.  George  Vincent  Welter,  who  did  this  work. 

The  tables  are  arranged  in  vertical  columns,  and  are  carried  across  two  pages. 
Thus,  counting  from  right  to  left,  the  first  column  contains  the  geographical  names 
mentioned  in  the  text ;  the  second,  the  translation  of  the  text,  the  chief  variant  trans- 
lations being  also  given  ;  the  third,  the  transliteration  with  occasional  grammatical 
notes.  The  fourth  column  contains  an  elaborate  transliteration,  in  which  every 
sign,  other  than  alphabetic,  is  numbered  according  to  the  numeration  of  the  Table 
of  Signs  in  Erman's  Egyptian  Grammar ;  it  is  thus  possible  to  reconstruct  the 
original  reading  of  any  word  when  the  original  itself  is  not  at  hand.  In  the  fifth 
column,  or  series  of  columns,  on  the  extreme  left,  are  the  references  to  every  line 
of  the  quotation  in  the  principal  publications  of  the  text.  Every  text  is  preceded 
by  a  short  introduction,  giving  as  far  as  possible  all  that  is  known  and  all  that  has 
been  published  on  that  inscription  or  papyrus. 

The  book  is  consequently  of  great  value  to  all  students  of  early  geography  and 
early  history  as  well  as  to  Egyptologists.  To  the  last  it  is  invaluable  on  account 
of  the  mass  of  accurate  detail  which  it  contains. 

There  are,  however,  a  few  arrangements  which  might  well  be  amended  in 
a  second  volume.  Each  text  is  comprised  in  a  table,  and  each  table  is  numbered  ; 
but  beyond  this,  there  is  no  system  by  which  reference  can  be  made  to  the  pages ; 
there  are  no  page  headings  and  no  page  numbers.  The  tale  of  Sanehat,  for 
instance,  covers  twenty  double  pages,  with  introduction  and  text ;  but  there  is  no 
means  of  distinguishing  at  a  glance  those  pages  from  one  another,  or  from  the 
pages  devoted  to  other  texts.  A  book  of  reference  should  be  essentially  a  book  to 
which  it  is  easy  to  refer,  and  the  want  of  some  method  to  make  reference  easy  is 
a  serious  defect.  The  references  to  publications,  given  in  the  introductions,  would 
be  better  in  alphabetical  order.  The  plan  of  the  Palermo  Stone  has  been  placed 
sideways  on  the  page  without  any  reason  ;  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  placed 
it  vertically. 

As  regards  the  transliteration  and  translation,  there  are  a  few  emendations  to 
be  suggested.  Amongst  others,  sU  the  name  of  the  first  season  of  the  year,  is  now 
read  '■i'Jtt ;  hrriw-s'  is  probably  more  correct  than  /irrw-s'  ;  three  out  of  the  four 
Hebrew  equivalents  given  are  wrong  letters  ;  and  the  deity  of  wisdom,  Seshat,  is 
a  goddess,  not  a  god. 

M.  A.  M. 

F 


82  Reviews. 

The  Tlieban  Necropolis  in  the  Middle  Kingdom. — H.  E.  WiNLOCK.  (From 
the  American  Journal  of  Semitic  Languages  and  Literature,  Oct.,  1915.) 

It  is  unfortunate  that  important  papers  are  so  often  scattered  in  unlikely 
places.  The  present  subject  is  neither  Semitic,  nor  Language,  nor  Literature,  but  an 
important  study  in  archaeology.  The  main  new  idea  is  that  the  large  courts,  with 
colonnades  and  tombs  cut  in  their  sides,  in  the  Antef  cemetery  north  of  the  Valley 
of  the  Kings,  were  the  tombs  of  the  earlier  Antefs ;  also  that  the  Mentuhetep 
temple  of  Deir  el-Bahri,  and  another  begun  to  the  south  of  that,  were  enlargements 
of  the  same  idea.  A  map  of  the  Theban  cemetery  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  clears 
up  the  view,  without  the  complication  of  the  great  mass  of  later  remains. 

The  whole  form  of  the  Xlth  dynasty  as  discussed  by  previous  writers  is 
reviewed  in  detail,  an  excellent  study  of  a  complex  subject.  The  whole  of  the 
monuments  are  considered,  and  this  is  a  review  of  facts  rather  than  mere  opinions. 
One  of  the  main  questions  is  the  history  of  the  Deir  el-Bahri  temple.  There  two 
separate  royal  title-groups  are  found,  and  from  their  relation  Mr.  Winlock  concludes 
that  they  truly  represent  two  different  kings,  as  follows  : — 


M.n^4m(Ml(MMS^ 


J-  Mi= m  C^]  ¥  (MK1 

The  first  of  these  kings  consolidated  the  Theban  kingdom  by  the  conquest  of 
Herakleopolis,  and  ruled  all  Egypt  energetically. 

The  second  of  these  kings,  in  a  reign  of  nearly  half  a  century,  strengthened 
the  kingdom,  and  rose  beyond  all  trace  of  barbarism  in  his  work.  He  remodelled 
the  Deir  el-Bahri  temple,  so  that  the  original  form  is  obscured.  Nebtauira  Mentu- 
hetep was  his  son  and  co-regent ;  Sonkhkara  was  the  last  of  the  dynasty. 

Thus  the  whole  dynasty  is  reconstructed  as  follows  : — 

1.  Nomarch  of  Thebes,  Antef. 

2.  Prince  Antef,  son  of  Akua,       ~\ 

3.  Prince  Antef,  of  Karnak  list,      >  possibly  one  person. 

4.  Prince  of  Upper  Egypt,  Antef,  J 

5.  Horus  Uah-onkh,  Antef-oa  I. 

6.  Horus  Nekht  Neb-tef-nefer,  Antef  H. 

7.  Horus  Sonkh-ab-taui,  Mentuhetep  I. 

8.  Neb-hapt-ra,  Mentuhetep  H. 

9.  Neb-hept-ra,  Mentuhetep  HI. 

10.  Neb-taui-ra,  Mentuhetep  IV. 

11.  Sonkh-kara,  Mentuhetep  V. 

This  reckoning  does  not  account  for  Neb-hetep  sA  ra  Mentuhetep,  whose 
Falcon  and  Nebti  names  are  the  same  as  those  of  No.  8.  It  also  assumes  the  late 
date  of  Nub-kheper-ra  Antef,  which  is  flatly  contradicted  by  the  style  of  his 
scarabs,  closely  like  those  of  Senusert  I.  Nor  does  it  include  Qa-ka-ra  Antef. 
Also  the  king's  son  Antef  of  Shut  er-Rigalch  is  put  down  as  a  vassal  of  Neb-hept-ra, 
No.  9,  although  he  has  a  cartouche  and  the  epithet  onkh  zetta.  A  vassal  of  such 
importance  between  Thebes  and  Silsileh  is  very  unlikely.  There  seems  no  reason 
for  this  Antef  not  having  succeeded  Neb-hept-ra.  Thus  we  are  by  no  means  at 
the  end  of  the  difficulties  about  this  dynasty. 


Reviews,  83 

A  useful  clearance  of  an  error  is  made  regarding  the  Antef  pyramids.  The 
common  idea  is  proved  to  be  entirely  mistaken  of  a  mud-brick  pyramid,  published 
by  Prisse,  belonging  to  an  Antef;  that  being  a  Saite  building  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Assasif  Further,  the  brick  pyramids  on  Drah  abu  '1-Naga  are  of  the  XVIIIth  and 
XlXth  dynasties.  The  only  known  locality  of  Antef  monuments  is  shown  to  be 
the  Antef  cemetery,  north  of  the  King's  Vallej-.  Three  great  sunken  courts,  with 
tombs  opening  off  the  sides  of  them,  are  attributed  to  Antef  I  (by  his  stele), 
Antef  II,  and  Mentuhetep  I,  by  the  relative  positions  on  the  ground. 

From  this  view  of  the  great  tomb  courts,  with  the  king  buried  at  the  head, 
and  the  courtiers  along  the  sides,  Mr.  Winlock  passes  to  a  resemblance  in  the 
temple  of  Mentuhetep  II  and  III,  with  a  long  approach  flanked  by  tombs  of 
courtiers.  Further,  the  plan  and  views  are  given  of  a  great  unfinished  cutting  and 
banking  which  ran  up  to  a  very  similar  position  behind  Sheykh  Abd  el-Qurneh, 
which  suggests  that  Neb-taui-ra  or  Sonkh-kara  was  preparing  a  similar  tomb  in 
that  region.  The  tombs  of  courtiers  flank  the  causeway,  one  being  that  very 
prominent  colonnade  on  the  top  of  Abd  el-Qurneh  hill ;  it  is  disappointingly 
blank  owing  to  its  being  of  the  Xlth  and  not  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  It  is 
supposed  that  this  royal  tomb  was  not  yet  finished  when  the  capital  was  transferred 
by  Amenemhot  I  to  Lisht.  If  this  were  so,  then  the  unfinished  tomb  would  be  of 
Sonkhkara,  and  that  of  Neb-taui-ra  is  yet  unplaced.  There  is  a  possibility,  not 
yet  suggested,  that  Hatshepsut  used  the  site  of  an  earlier  temple,  and  reconstructed 
it ;  this  might  account  for  the  temple  and  tomb  of  Nebtauira.  Otherwise  it  might 
be  worth  searching  in  the  valleys  below  the  northern  peak  which  is  covered  by 
Sonkhkara's  sed  heb  temple,  in  case  his  tomb  was  placed  below  his  temple. 

This  paper  is  the  first  well-reasoned  view  of  the  early  Theban  cemetery,  and 
it  suggests  a  whole  system  of  researches  on  a  scientific  basis.  The  Government 
could  not  do  better  than  put  all  Western  Thebes  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Winlock, 
with  complete  control  of  all  excavations  that  may  be  undertaken  there,  so  as  to 
co-ordinate  the  entire  work  of  different  nationalities  into  a  systematic  whole,  and 
solve  the  many  historical  questions  that  might  be  thus  settled. 

Bulletin  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art.  10  cents,  monthly.  New  York. 
June,  September,  October,  November,  December,  191 5,  February,  1916. 

These  recent  numbers  have  special  interest  for  Egyptian  students.  Last  June 
there  is  an  account,  with  photographs,  of  the  heart  scarab  of  Queen  Amenardas. 
It  was  presented,  with  a  group  of  small  Egyptian  objects,  by  a  lady,  apparently 
the  result  of  tourist  gleaning  in  Egypt  about  1906.  Happily  it  is  safe  now  in  the 
Museum.  The  body  is  thin  and  flat,  like  late  heart  scarabs ;  it  is  said  to  be  of 
green  porphyry ;  the  cutting  is  very  clear,  though  the  forms  are  poor ;  the 
inscription  is  the  usual  chapter  of  the  heart.  The  various  ushabtis  of  this  queen, 
cut  in  dark  brown  serpentine,  have  been  known  for  many  years  ;  this  heart  scarab 
confirms  the  opening  of  the  tomb  in  modern  times,  though  its  position  is  quite 
unknown  to  historians. 

Another  paper  is  on  a  group  of  gold  pendants,  between  the  XXth  and 
XXVth  dynasties.  The  seventeen  rams'  heads  suggest  the  Ethiopian  dynasty; 
there  are  also  fifteen  gold  flies  and  six  of  the  aegis  of  Bast  or  Sekhmet.  With  this 
journal  is  also  a  supplement  on  jewellery  in  the  Museum,  issued  to  encourage 
jewellers  to  study  it.  A  fine  complete  bead  collar  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  is  shown  ;  but 
all  the  other  jewellery  is  Greek,  Cypriote,  Etruscan,  Roman,  Byzantine,  or  later. 

F  2 


84  Reviews. 

The  September  number  gives  an  account  of  the  educational  value  of  the 
Museum.  "  All  of  the  museums  have  been  energetically  spreading  the  news  of 
their  willingness  to  co-operate  with  the  public  schools,  to  help  designers,  and  to 
assist  members  to  a  better  understanding  of  their  own  institutions."  There  follows 
a  list  of  forty  lectures  on  various  subjects,  from  two  to  six  in  a  course.  School 
handbooks  on  Ancient  and  European  history  are  also  being  prepared.  We  may 
add  that  similarly  Prof  Breasted,  at  Chicago,  has  been  concentrating  on  preparing 
school  manuals  on  history,  and  almost  suspended  his  Egyptian  studies  in  con- 
sequence. The  United  States  will  soon  no  longer  look  on  the  Old  World 
as  something  detached  and  apart,  but  will  have  a  keener  sense  of  history  than  we 
have.  An  English  scholar  might  contemn  the  popular  style  of  some  of  the 
lectures  announced  at  New  York  ;  but  it  is  just  because  that  education  of  the 
public  has  been  despised  here,  that  now  the  public  cannot  understand  research,  and 
will  not  further  it,  but  sleepily  agree  to  close  our  museums. 

Other  branches  of  museum  activity  are  the  lending  of  sets  of  photographs 
fully  labelled,  along  with  books  on  the  subject  of  the  set,  to  the  Public  Library,  to 
spread  general  knowledge  of  them.  Such  sets,  changed  from  time  to  time,  will 
open  many  minds  to  regions  entirely  unknown  before.  Co-operation  with  High 
School  classes  is  also  actively  worked. 

Models  of  the  most  important  buildings  in  the  world,  to  a  large  scale  of 
one-twentieth,  serve  to  give  reality  to  what  would  otherwise  be  only  a  bookish 
impression.  Such  a  scale  enables  the  minute  detail  of  decoration  to  be  shown,  so 
that  real  study  is  promoted.  There  is  a  large  demand  for  loans  of  lantern  slides, 
579  borrowers  in  the  year.  The  most  wanted  were  sets  of  pictures,  next 
architecture,  then  ancient  and  modern  life  in  different  countries  ;  while  less  required 
were  sculpture,  furniture,  tapestry,  etc.  This  is  the  way  to  reach  a  million  people, 
from  whom  will  come  a  thousand  students,  who  may  in  turn  produce  ten  men  to 
seriously  advance  our  general  knowledge.  Without  such  education  of  the  public 
the  position  is  almost  hopeless. 

The  Egyptian  section  has  advanced,  with  study  rooms  provided  for  the 
material  and  records  required  by  students,  keeping  the  open  galleries  for  the 
education  of  the  public. 

The  Museum  staffs  are  the  true  educators  of  the  public,  and  they  understand 
their  function  at  New  York.  Not  only  do  they  help  the  specialist,  who  knows 
exactly  what  he  wants,  but  they  help  the  vacuously  minded  to  feed  the  smallest 
intellectual  hunger,  in  order  that  the  mind  may  grow  by  what  it  feeds  upon.  Let 
us  always  remember  from  what  unpromising  beginnings  many  of  our  greatest 
workers  have  come.  A  Murchison,  a  Faraday,  a  Rayleigh,  a  George  Smith,  have 
all  been  due  to  fresh  impulses  in  their  lives,  which  might  have  been  expected  to 
take  quite  different  shapes. 

The  October  number  states  the  effect  of  the  war  in  suspending  American  work 
in  Egypt  on  excavation  at  Lisht,  while  the  work  at  Thebes  and  copying  of  the 
Theban  tombs  under  Mr.  Davies  was  continued  as  before.  A  statement  is  made 
as  to  the  artistic  property  of  Mr.  Theodore  M.  Davis,  which  he  bequeathed  entirely 
to  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  New  York.  This  gathering  was  not  only  artistic 
in  general  but  contained  some  of  the  duplicates  from  the  discoveries  of  the  Tombs 
of  the  Kings.     It  is  an  important  addition  to  the  public  treasures  of  America. 

The  November  Bulletin  has  on  the  front  of  it  all  that  will  ever  be  seen  of  the 
funeral  figure  of  Nekht,  whose  tomb  is  so  well  known  at  Thebes.  This  figure  had 
lain  safe  and  perfect  in  the  pit  of  the  tomb  until  excavated  last  year.     Despatched 


Reviews. 


85 


on  the  "  Arabic,"  with  much  else,  it  was  sunk  off  Ireland  by  a  German  submarine. 
Since  then  nothing  more  is  to  be  shipped  to  the  New  York  Museum  until  the  war 
and  its  perils  are  finished. 

Mr.  Davies  ^ives  an  account  of  the  interesting  work  that  he  has  been  doing 
on  the  Theban  tombs.  The  great  tomb  of  Surer  was  finally  cleared  ;  and  this 
chamberlain  of  Amenhetep  III  is  now  seen  to  have  provided  for  himself  one  of  the 
finest  of  private  tombs.  After  the  front  court  is  a  hall  with  ten  columns  across  it, 
and  ten  behind  these.     Then  a  hall  seventy-four  feet  long  with  an  avenue  of  ten 


■r5 


'-7   i 


i 


Figure  of  Nekht  holding  Stele  of  Adoration  to  Ra. 
Found  in  his  Tomb.  Sunk  in  the  "Arabic." 


columns  on  either  hand.  Behind  that  a  hall  with  twenty-four  columns ;  and  finally 
a  chamber  with  six  columns  containing  the  burial  pits.  The  remaining  sculptures 
are  of  the  finest  work  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty;  but  unfortunately  Surer  had  clung 
to  the  Amen  party,  and  hence  his  tomb  was  mainly  wrecked  by  the  Aten  party, 
and  most  of  its  decoration  and  furniture  destroyed. 

The   well-known  tomb  of  Puamra,  with  figures  of  the  two  obelisks  and  the 
architects,  was  cleared.      The  difficulties  showed  the  extraordinary  condition  of 

F  3 


86  Reviews. 

underground  Qurneh.  The  rock  is  so  honeycombed  with  passages,  and  these  have 
been  so  often  broken  through  from  one  to  another,  that  when  one  is  cleared  the 
filling  of  the  others  runs  down  at  all  the  breaks,  and  the  whole  neighbourhood 
begins  to  subside  in  patches  like  a  salt  mine  district.  The  native  dwellings 
crowded  among  the  tombs  soon  felt  the  effects,  and  the  subsiding  occupants 
protested  against  such  unseen  dangers.  The  chambers  in  one  part  were  three  stories 
deep.  The  burial  of  Puamra  was  reached  by  a  well  in  the  courtyard,  a  sloping 
passage,  two  stairways  and  two  intermediate  chambers  ;  the  body  had  of  course  been 
long  ago  destroyed.     The  tombs  of  Userhat  and  Tehutiemhet  were  also  cleared. 

The  bright  and  fresh  little  tomb  of  Nekht  is  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the 
Theban  cemetery.  This  was  cleared  and  the  statue  was  found,  whose  loss  we  have 
above  mentioned.  The  main  work  of  Mr.  Davies  himself  has  been  in  copying, 
with  assistants,  part  or  the  whole  of  seven  of  the  painted  tombs. 

In  the  December  number  is  an  account  of  the  excavations  at  Thebes  on  the 
site  of  the  palace  of  Amenhetep  III.  The  building  uncovered  has  much  the  same 
arrangement  as  that  for  the  king's  own  use,  and  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  for 
a  queen  or  prince,  perhaps  part  of  a  general  quarter  for  the  royal  children.  Much 
else  still  remains  to  be  cleared  in  this  region. 

In  the  February  number  is  an  account  of  the  moving  of  one  of  the  mastabas 
of  the  Old  Kingdom  from  Saqqareh  to  New  York  Museum.  Not  only  there,  but 
to  several  other  countries  whole  mastabas  have  been  removed ;  Berlin  and 
Brussels  show  such  examples.  England — in  charge  of  Egypt — has  not  a  single 
specimen  of  a  construction  on  such  a  scale. 


Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin.     Boston.     December,  191 5. 

This  number  is  occupied  with  a  considerable  account  of  the  important 
excavations  in  Nubia  by  Dr.  Reisner.  This  is  in  continuation  of  the  work  at 
Kerma,  which  we  summarised  in  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1914,  p.  138.  The  further 
examination  of  the  skeletons  has  shown  that  the  chieftains  who  were  found  lying 
on  couches  in  the  graves  were  Egyptians,  and  the  people  buried  with  them  were 
Nubians.  Further  work  on  the  purely  Nubian  graves  has  produced  burials  of 
Nubian  chiefs,  in  large  circular  pits  with  one  to  three  women  and  from  five  to  thirty 
goats.  The  Egyptian  rulers  extended  this  custom  to  having  from  ten  to  thirty 
human  sacrifices.     These  burials  were  covered  by  tumuli  of  earth. 

Three  great  tumuli  far  exceeded  the  others  :  these  were  found  to  be  the  burials 
of  Egyptian  governors  of  the  Sudan  during  the  Middle  Kingdom.  The  greatest 
surprise  was  when  one  of  these  burials  proved  to  be  that  of  Hepzefa,  whose 
immense  rock  tomb  is  so  well  known  at  Siut  under  Senusert  I.  In  that  tomb — 
now  called  the  Stabl  Antar — there  are  long  contracts  regarding  the  supply  of 
offerings  to  his  statues  in  the  tomb.  We  now  know  that  the  magnificent  sepulchre 
which  he  had  provided  for  himself  as  chief  of  the  nome,  served  only  for  his  statues 
and  -('rt- offerings.  He  really  died  in  his  distant  governorship,  more  than  five  hundred 
miles  away,  and  was  buried  with  all  the  regal  barbaric  pomp  of  the  Sudan. 

The  tomb  was  an  immense  mound,  three  hundred  feet  across,  outlined  by 
a  low  wall.  Across  the  circle,  from  side  to  side,  ran  a  brick-walled  corridor  seven 
or  eight  feet  wide.  At  the  middle  of  this  opened  on  one  side  the  brick-vaulted 
burial  chamber.  After  the  funeral  some  three  hundred  Nubians,  men,  women  and 
children  were  strangled  and  laid  out  along  the  corridor,  which  was,  in  fact,  the 
antechamber  of  slaves  before   the   tomb.      With   these   sacrificed    Nubians   were 


Reviews.  87 

personal  ornaments,  sometimes  pottery  and,  rarely,  weapons.  Over  the  whole 
mound  was  laid  a  coating  of  mud  bricks  ;  on  the  top  a  great  pyramidion  of  quartzite, 
and  probably  a  chapel  for  offerings,  in  which  stood  the  statues  of  Hepzefa  and  his 
wife  Sennu,  which  were  found  fallen  down  into  pits  dug  by  plunderers.  The  figure 
of  Hepzefa  had  been  much  broken,  only  a  stump  of  throne  remaining  :  that  of  the 
wife  was  perfect.  At  the  funeral  feast  over  a  thousand  oxen  were  sacrificed,  and 
their  skulls  buried  around  the  great  mound  on  its  southern  side. 

Some  time  after  the  great  burial,  it  was  the  custom  to  dig  into  the  mound  and 
line  pits  with  loose  bricks  to  serve  as  graves.  In  these  were  bodies  lying  on 
wooden  couches  with  offerings.  The  whole  mound,  when  it  became  weathered, 
was  outlined  with  a  band  of  dark  stone  chips,  and  sprinkled  over  with  white 
pebbles. 

In  another  of  the  great  mounds  was  a  statue  of  Khu-taui-ra,  the  first  king  of 
the  Xlllth  dynasty.  Some  fifteen  or  twenty  large  mounds,  not  quite  of  the  vice- 
regal size,  are  probably  the  graves  of  other  high  officials  and  chiefs. 

The  objects  found  in  these  burials  are  of  two  classes,  Egyptian  and  Sudani. 
The  statues,  the  alabaster  vases,  the  copper  mirrors  and  knives,  and  some  of  the 
scarabs  and  pottery,  are  pure  Egyptian.  The  bulk  of  the  pottery — 293  different 
forms — part  of  the  scarabs,  and  the  glazed  pottery,  was  of  local  manufacture.  The 
forms  of  the  alabaster  vases  are  what  we  know  well  to  belong  to  the  Xllth  dynasty  : 
large  globular  vases,  drop-shaped  vases,  and  trumpet-mouthed  kohl-pots.  One 
squat  form  has  not  been  dated  before.  The  copper  mirrors  are  mostly  of  the  type 
with  two  hawks  below  the  disc,  a  head  of  Hathor  between  them,  and  a  handle 
of  plaited  or  braided  wire  pattern.  The  copper  knives  are,  some,  of  the  straight 
back  style  of  the  Xllth  dynasty;  but  others  are  curved  backward,  and  two  have 
gazelle  leg  handles.  If  these  are  certainly  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  they  will  give 
a  useful  date,  as  such  forms  have  been  attributed  to  the  New  Kingdom.  The 
daggers  are  all  of  the  type  with  a  large  flat  ivory  handle,  as  Gardner  Wilkinson, 
fig.  46.  This  form  is  rare  in  Egypt,  and  we  may  now  gather  that  it  is  Sudani  of 
the  Middle  Kingdom.  No  tools  whatever  were  found,  only  daggers  and  personal 
implements. 

The  most  surprising  local  product  is  the  glazed  pottery.  As  all  over  the  site 
are  the  half-glazed  pebbles  used  in  the  furnace  floors,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to 
the  work  being  local.  Many  pieces  of  wasters  of  glazed  ware  also  showed  this. 
There  is  not  only  blue-glazed  pottery,  but  also  quartzite  and  quartz  crystal  with 
blue  or  green  glazing.  There  were  "  bowls,  pear-shaped  and  globular  pots, 
cylindrical  cups,  jugs,  rilled  beakers,  and  covers,  and  kohl-pots ;  mace-heads, 
imitation  shells,  hippopotami,  lions,  scorpions,  amulets,  plaques,  models  of  boats, 
figures  of  boatmen,  inlay  pieces,  and  tiles  of  many  types.  The  inlays  were  used 
to  decorate  ivory  boxes  and  sandstone  ceiling  slabs.  The  tiles  were  used  to 
decorate  walls  and  large  pottery  vessels.  Parts  of  several  lions  in  relief  were  found 
which  had  apparently  been  fastened  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  in  Mound  II.  The 
decorations  on  all  forms  of  faience  were  in  black  line  drawing  on  a  blue  ground." 
This  latter  reminds  us  of  the  hundreds  of  pieces  of  blue  plaques  and  objects  with 
black  drawings  found  in  the  temple  of  Scrabit  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

The  native  pottery  has  some  affinity  with  the  prehistoric  forms  of  Egypt, 
though  no  one  piece  could  be  mistaken  as  being  of  that  family.  Bird- shaped 
vases  and  spouted  vases  are  like  the  older  types.  A  tall  beaker  with  wide  spiral 
groove  around  it,  and  fluted  below,  seems  evidently  a  copy  of  metal  work,  probably 
in  gold.     We  are  assured  that  the  black  pottery  is  polished  with  blacklead ;  as 

F  4 


38  Reviews, 

the  lustrous  magnetite  is  extremely  like  blackiead,  the  evidences  as  to  the  material 
should  be  put  beyond  question  by  a  chemist.  Other  little  jugs,  with  incised  patterns, 
are  of  the  family  so  well  known  in  the  Delta  graves  of  the  Hyksos,  and  were 
probably  carried  to  Nubia. 

The  seals  of  ivory  with  geometrical  designs  "  are  undoubtedly  of  local  origin. 
The  patterns  are  combinations  of  crossed  lines,  such  as  do  not  occur  in  Egypt." 
The  whole  of  these  certainly  need  careful  study  and  comparison. 

We  greatly  hope  that  Dr.  Reisner  will  thoroughly  publish  all  of  this  material, 
separating  each  group  of  objects  which  are  certainly  contemporary,  such  as  those 
with  the  three  hundred  Nubian  burials  of  one  date.  There  will  be  thus  a  large 
extent  of  material  by  which  to  standardise  our  dating  of  the  smaller  arts.  This 
discovery  is  of  great  value  for  purely  Egyptian  dating,  as  well  as  for  the  relations 
of  Egypt  and  the  Sudan,  and  the  high  and  strange  civilisation  shown  by  the  Sudani 
glazed  ware  and  pottery. 

The  Rock   Tombs  of  Meir.     Part   III. — Aylward  M.  Blackman.     36  pp., 

39  plates,  4to.     25J.     1915.     (Egypt  Exploration  Fund.) 

The  continuation  of  this  series  is  on  the  same  complete  plan  as  the  previous 
parts ;  unfortunately,  the  diversity  of  scales  is  continued,  the  outline  sheets  alone 
being  \,  \,  \,  or  |,  while  the  five  coloured  plates  are  to  four  different  scales.  This 
needless  disregard  of  scale  is  a  serious  hindrance  of  understanding  the  relation  of 
parts  in  their  positions  and  their  sizes  ;  it  is  hardly  ever  needful  to  change  scales  in 
one  series,  as  see  the  copies  of  Medmn  and  Deshasheli,  each  uniform. 

The  volume  is  entirely  occupied  by  one  tomb,  that  of  Ukh-hetep,  son  of 
Ukh-hetep  and  Mersa,  in  the  reign  of  Amenemhat  II.  The  outline  plates  give 
all  the  subjects  complete,  but  a  key  sheet  is  somewhat  needed.  Five  coloured 
plates  show  the  more  interesting  details,  and  the  seven  plates  of  photographs  give 
general  views  and  the  better  preserved  scenes.  The  subjects  of  the  scenes  are 
not  of  the  same  importance  as  in  the  previous  volumes,  being  all  parallel  to 
those  in  well-known  tombs.  The  two  new  points  of  value  are,  (i)  A  charming 
piece  of  decoration,  well  given  in  colour,  most  nearly  like  a  pattern  in  Prisse,  Art, 
but  simpler,  and  here  well  dated  ;  and  (2)  The  list  of  previous  nomarchs. 

The  list  of  nomarchs  is  the  first  document,  outside  of  the  lists  of  kings,  which 
carries  through  from  the  Xllth  back  to  the  Vth  dynasty.  It  is,  therefore,  of  value 
as  historical  evidence  of  the  periods  involved.  In  order  to  accommodate  it  to 
the  arbitrary  dating  of  Berlin,  the  average  of  rule  of  a  nomarch  is  assumed  by 
Mr.  Blackman  at  1 5  years,  which  is  absurd  for  any  such  series.  Though  sometimes 
brothers  succeeded  one  another  in  office,  yet  at  other  times  sons  died  before  their 
fathers  and  grandsons  succeeded.  The  average  of  the  Jewish  kings  is  23  years 
each,  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  from  Aahmes  to  Akhenaten  24  years  each,  of  the 
English  kings  from  the  Conquest,  23  years.  Such  must  therefore  be  accepted  for  a 
family  succession  of  rulers,  with  an  average  of  irregularities  of  all  sorts.  Accepting 
this  general  value,  the  fi.xed  points  in  the  series  of  nomarchs,  and  according  to  the 
chronology  given  by  the  Egyptians,  is  : — 


REIGN.  B.C. 

No.     I.     Senusert  I  .     .     .     .  3515 

No.  21.     IX-Xth  dynasty.     .  3815 

No.  36.     Pepy  II 4320 

No.  39.     Nefer-khou.     .     .     .  4415 


BY  kings'  lists. 

=  3515- 

=  3600-3900. 

=4185. 
=  4405. 


Reviews.  89 

The  last  is  the  best  fixed  point,  as  the  falcon  name  of  king  Nefer-ra  (V,  5)  is 
not  in  the  least  likely  to  be  adopted  later.  Here  we  see  that  the  list  shows  the 
general  scale  of  the  history  to  have  been  correctly  given  by  the  Egyptians  them- 
selves, and  is  ong  more  impossibility  in  the  arbitrary  fancies  of  Berlin  dating.  The 
last  two  registers  of  the  list  appear  to  be  of  additional  names,  probably  of  rulers 
who  were  appointed  outside  of  the  family  succession.  No.  48  being  probably  of 
the  Xlth  dynasty,  and  58  of  about  the  same  time.  Mr.  Blackman  is  to  be  con- 
gratulated on  having  saved  so  much  of  what  Egypt  has  done  its  worst  to  destroy 
in  the  last  fifty  years. 

The  Manchester  Museum.     Report  for  1914-1 5. 

A  Museum  Report  is  usually  of  individual  rather  than  general  interest.  Here, 
.however,  is  described  an  experiment  which  may  well  spread  in  this  country. 
Many  schools  in  Manchester  were  requisitioned  for  military  purposes,  and  the 
scholars  had  to  share  half  time  in  other  schools.  There  were  thus  many  children 
displaced  for  half  their  time.  These  have  now  been  kept  in  hand  by  a  system  of 
elementary  science  and  history  teaching  in  the  Museum.  "  Eight  classes — of  one 
hour's  duration — are  held  daily,  four  by  each  teacher  ;  two  in  the  morning  and  two 
in  the  afternoon.  Each  lesson  consists  of  from  thirty  to  forty  minutes'  instruction 
in  the  class  room,  followed  by  a  tour  of  the  cases  in  the  Museum  dealing  with  the 
particular  subject  taught."  Manchester  Museum  is  particularly  well  fitted  for  such 
teaching,  as  there  is  a  fine  series  of  all  the  orders  and  principal  species  of  animals, 
.a  fine  series  of  fossils  and  minerals,  and  an  unusually  interesting  and  complete 
■collection  of  Egyptian  history  and  daily  life.  This  is  the  true  way  to  bring 
Museum  knowledge  into  the  common  fund  of  information,  instead  of  the  "  moral 
bankruptcy  "  of  closing  museums,  for  which  we  deserve  the  Continental  despite. 

Journal  of  the  Manchester  Egyptian  and  Oriental  Society,  1914-15.  Svo,  63  pp. 
-191 5.     5  J. 

Beside  the  current  business  and  short  reports  of  papers,  this  Journal  contains 
some  longer  articles,  especially  pp.  27-48,  by  Mr.  Peet,  on  "  The  Early  Relations  of 
Egypt  and  Asia."  In  prehistoric  days  the  lazuli  is  doubted  by  Mr.  Peet  as  coming 
from  Persia,  on  the  ground  that  it  might  be  in  the  Eastern  desert.  As,  however, 
it  would  be  very  unlikely  that  obsidian  should  be  obtained  nearer  than  the  Aegean 
Islands,  it  must  be  granted  that  there  was  an  extent  of  trade  which  makes  the 
Persian  route  quite  likely.  The  plaque  of  Den  bears  a  figure  which  appears  to  be 
called  an  eastern.  In  Sinai,  Semerkhet  is  shown  smiting  a  Sinaitic  chief  The 
1st  dynasty  ends  with  the  figure  labelled  with  the  place-name  Setet.  This  name, 
however,  may  be  either  Asiatic  or  from  the  Cataract  region ;  as  the  head  is 
distinctly  like  the  Libyan,  it  is  more  likely  to  be  from  the  Cataract,  where  the  early 
population  had  Libyan  characteristics.  Thus  Den  and  Semerkhet  show  fighting 
over  the  Eastern  frontier,  but  whether  as  far  as  Palestine,  is  not  at  all  settled. 

In  the  Old  Kingdom  Khufu  records  at  Sinai  the  "  Smiting  the  Anu,"  but  the 
Anu  seems  to  be  a  generic  term  for  barbarians.  Sahura  in  the  Vth  dynasty 
smites  "the  Mentu  and  all  countries  "  ;  Ne-user-ra  states  the  same.  On  his  temple 
of  Abusir  are  excellent  typical  figures  of  Libyans,  Puntites  and  Asiatics.  The 
same  figures  appear  among  the  prisoners  of  Sahura,  also  two  other  types  of  bearded 
Asiatics.  In  the  Vlth  dynasty  Una  records  the  defeat  of  the  "  Aamuwhoare  upon 
the   sand,"  meaning  the  desert  between   Egypt  and   Palestine,  showing  that  the 


go  Reviews, 

Egyptian  was  not  yet  holding  any  of  Palestine.  These  same  Aamu  extended  down 
the  Red  Sea  shore,  as  they  were  defeated  when  the  Egyptians  were  building  a  boat 
to  go  to  Punt. 

During  the  Vllth  to  Xth  dynasties  an  Asiatic  invasion  of  Egypt  can  be  dis- 
covered. Ameny  =  Amenemhat  I  is  described  as  ejecting  the  Aamu,  and  building 
the  wall  across  the  Wady  Tumilat  to  exclude  them.  In  a  papyrus  of  admonitions 
to  King  Merykara  of  the  IXth  dynasty,  his  father  describes  defeating  the  Aamu. 
A  later  papyrus,  of  Leiden,  was  probably  copied  from  one  about  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
and  it  describes  the  foreigners  in  the  Delta,  and  civil  war  throughout  Egypt.  AD 
of  this  agrees  with  the  archaeological  evidence  not  touched  by  Mr.  Peet.  The 
abundant  button  seals  begin  in  the  Vlth  dynasty,  and  were  mostly  about  the 
Vllth  and  Vlllth;  their  designs  are  always  foreign,  though  often  copied  from 
Egyptian  figures ;  and  similar  patterns  have  been  found  at  Aleppo  and  Bismiyeh 
in  Mesopotamia. 

The  Middle  Kingdom  knew  much  more  of  Palestine.  Neb-hetep  Mentuhetep 
figures  captives  of  Nubia,  Libya,  and  Asiatics ;  but  whether  the  latter  were  still  in 
the  Delta,  or  farther  out,  is  not  stated.     Neb-hept-ra  Mentuhetep  mentions  fighting 

Aamu  and  Mentu  Asiatics ;  this  might  yet  be  in  the  Delta.     Under there 

is  the  inscription  of  Sebek-khu  naming  a  war  at  Sekmem  and  the  land  of  Retenu, 
where  he  fought  with  Aamu.  This  shows  penetration  into  Palestine,  though  how 
far  is  not  clear.  A  few  other  references  to  Asiatics  do  not  take  us  any  farther. 
The  mention  of  Aam  as  a  class  of  temple  servants  strongly  suggests  the  taking 
captive  of  many  of  the  Aamu ;  as  in  later  times,  Pakharu,  "  the  Syrian,"  was 
a  common  personal  name,  like  Mr.  French  in  England.  This  paper  makes  us  see 
how  very  uncertain  is  still  our  early  geographical  knowledge. 

Prof  Rhys  Davids  discusses  "  The  Beginnings  of  Religion."  This  deals  with 
the  broad  question  of  whether  we  are  to  take  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  the  less 
civilised  races  as  typical  of  ancient  thought,  or  whether  we  should  take  the  study  of 
an  ancient  religion  as  a  basis.  Prof  Davids  begins  by  begging  the  question.  "  It 
is  comparatively  easy  to  decide  which  of  these  two  methods  is  to  be  preferred," 
choosing  himself  the  latter  course,  in  opposition  to  the  whole  of  the  Tylor-Lang- 
Frazer  school.  The  difficulty  of  realising  the  sentiments  of  modern  peoples  is  taken 
as  an  argument  against  supposing  that  we  can  understand  the  barbaric  and  savage 
peoples  of  the  present.  But  it  is  a  far  stronger  argument  against  assuming  that  we. 
can  understand  the  development  of  any  people  of  the  past.  The  work  of  Foucart 
in  favour  of  adopting  our  knowledge  of  Egyptian  beliefs  as  typical,  rather  than  any 
ideas  of  modern  peoples,  is  upheld  as  the  best  type  for  such  studies. 

Now  all  this  is  part  of  a  system  of  thought  which  has  been  far  too  prevalent 
recently,  whether  in  economics,  politics,  history,  religion,  or  many  other  depart- 
ments. It  is  a  habit  of  looking  at  the  difficulties  of  one  side  of  a  subject,  and 
deciding  that  it  is  impossible  to  accept  it,  and  that  therefore  the  opposite  view  must 
be  true.  It  is  a  very  specious  method  for  those  who  do  not  know  all  the  facts,  and 
leads  to  a  comforting  self-assurance,  which  waives  aside  everything  else  that  may  be 
said.  The  only  real  road  to  a  conclusion  on  any  subject  is  to  balance  evidence. 
One  side  may  be  clearly  improbable  ;  but  if  the  only  alternative  is  still  more 
improbable,  or  impossible,  we  must  for  the  present  accept  the  least  improbable 
view. 

In  the  study  of  comparative  religion,  whatever  difficulty  we  have  in  entering 
into  the  thoughts  of  a  modern  man  of  another  race,  the  difficulty  is  far  greater  if  we 
try  to  understand  an  ancient  man's  thoughts.     The  modern  can  be  watched  in  his 


Reviews.  91 

actions,  he  is  not  only  known  by  some  scanty  remains ;  he  can  be  studied  over  and 
over  again,  the  evidences  about  him  are  not  limited  to  a  few  discoveries  or  writings ; 
above  all  he  can  be  interrogated  indefinitely  to  clear  up  questions,  and  often  the 
more  enlightened  men  will  describe  their  own  beliefs  and  practices  in  detail, 
whereas  the  ancient  is  dumb  and  can  only  be  understood  by  what  has  chanced  to 
survive  to  our  time. 

To  take  the  documents  that  remain  to  us  about  any  ancient  religion,  and 
ignore  all  the  living  parallels  which  explain  them,  would  be  like  studying  only  the 
bones  of  fossil  animals,  and  ignoring  the  parallels  of  living  animals  which  show 
how  the  bones  were  worked  by  muscles,  covered  by  tissues,  and  co-operated  in  the 
constant  maintenance  of  the  health  and  abilities  of  the  animal.  From  a  single 
bone  much  may  be  restored  to  view,  of  the  construction  and  place  in  nature  of  the 
living  structure  now  perished ;  but  this  can  only  be  done  by  strictly  comparative 
method,  and  utilising  every  analogy  with  present  structures.  So  in  the  history  of 
religious  thought  the  one  or  two  fossil  fragments  that  we  may  have,  about  some 
class  of  ideas,  can  only  be  interpreted  by  the  fullest  comparison  with  similar 
thought  still  surviving,  which  can  be  analysed  at  leisure  and  cross-questioned  in 
detail.  It  must  be  the  modern  examples  which  alone  can  restore  to  some 
similitude  of  life  the  ancient  specimens. 

Our  knowledge  of  Egyptian  practices  is  considerable  ;  but  we  are  yet  very 
ignorant  of  the  ideas  and  motives  which  lay  behind  those  practices.  How  far  the 
idea  has  perished  while  the  practice  continued,  how  far  fresh  ideas  had  arisen  as 
false  interpretations  of  the  practices,  whether  we  have  ever  yet  grasped  the  idea  at 
any  period,— all  this  is  yet  quite  vague  to  us.  Take  the  most  obvious  matters,  and 
see  how  blind  we  still  are  as  to  the  meanings  which  must  have  been  familiar  to 
every  Egyptian,  about  the  ka,  transmigration,  intercession  (on  which  an  entirely 
new  light  has  arisen,  see  our  last  number,  p.  35),  prayer,  and  influence  of  the  gods. 
On  any  of  these  points  five  minutes'  talk  with  an  educated  ancient  would  be  worth 
more  than  all  we  now  know.  How  can  such  fossil  fragments  compare  in  value 
with  the  full  study  that  is  made  of  any  modern  beliefs? 

Thus  the  objection  that  the  modern  beliefs  may  not  be  correct  interpreters  for 
ancient  times  is  a  trivial  difficulty  compared  with  the  obscurity  of  our  knowledge 
of  the  past.  The  only  logical  course  is  to  gather  all  we  possibly  can  of  the  fossil 
practices,  and  then  clothe  them  with  a  living  structure  of  ideas  by  means  of  the 
nearest  parallels  in  modern  thought. 

Prof.  Elliot  Smith  states  the  supposed  parallels  between  Egypt  and  other 
lands  of  "  Oriental  Tombs  and  Temples " ;  this  is  a  statement  of  resemblances 
which  does  not  carry  conviction  to  most  minds.  When  we  read  of  a  "  temporary 
spiral  causeway  made  for  constructional  purposes  "  round  a  pyramid,  it  is  as  well 
to  warn  readers  that  such  statements  have  no  accepted  ground. 

An  encomium  of  the  late  Prof  Cheyne  by  Prof  Canney  ends  the  number. 
Unfortunately  his  wild  disregard  of  known  history  must  react  upon  any  consideration 
of  the  amount  of  reliance  to  be  placed  upon  Prof  Cheyne's  affirmations. 


The  Theosophical  Path.     Jan.,  19 16. 

This  Californian  journal,  with  which  we  are  regularly  favoured,  does  not  usually 
give  scope  for  scientific  criticism.  We  are  the  more  bound,  therefore,  to  notice 
some  of  the  just  and  forcible  remarks  in  a  paper  on  The  Gift  of  Antiquity  to  Art, 
by  Grace  Knoche.     "  When  we  consider  that  an  evening  might  be  spent  with 


92  Reviews. 

profit  upon  a  single  nation  of  antiquity,  a  single  period  in  that  nation,  or  even  upon 
a  single  statue,  the  topic  assigned  .  .  .  sterns  broad  in  scope.  The  best  that  can 
be  done,  therefore,  is  to  take  a  running  glance  at  some  of  the  great  monuments  of 
antiquity  and  remind  ourselves  of  our  supreme  indebtedness  to  it — indebtedness  for 
form  as  well  as  contents,  for  technic  as  well  as  motif.  For  modern  art  depends 
upon  ancient  art  as  one  link  hangs  down  from  another  in  a  chain. 

"  Examine  whatever  special  branch  you  will,  there,  behind  the  modern  effort 
stands  the  great  art  of  the  past,  'as  one  in  eternal  waiting.'  And  yet,  although 
we  copy  and  appropriate,  there  is  always  something  that  eludes  us,  and  we  have 
not  gone  beyond  nor  even  reached  the  limits  set  ages  upon  ages  ago 

"  We  have  never  attained  Egyptian  understanding,  nor  Greek  forbearance,  in 
the  juxtaposition  of  plain  and  decorated  spaces.  We  have  nothing  in  ornamental 
detail  that  yet  can  make  superfluous  the  lotus,  the  acanthus,  or  the  honeysuckle 
motif.  We  have  never  devised  anything  in  continuous  pattern  that  can  improve 
upon  the  simple  egg  and  dart,  the  simple  astragal,  the  guilloche,  the  bead  and 
fillet,  the  rosette  and  spiral  patterns  from  the  Beni- Hasan  tombs."  .... 

Referring  to  the  Persian  tile-work  frieze  of  lions  :  "  Note  the  continuous  pattern 
both  above  and  below  the  lions,  which  we  have  appropriated  without  so  much  as 
a  '  thank  you,'  and  without  improving  upon  it  in  the  least.  And  this  is  but  one  of 
almost  numberless  examples,  for,  truth  to  tell,  there  is  not  a  corner  of  the  entire 
field  of  modern  art  that  antiquity  does  not  already  hold  in  fee  simple,  the  while  we 
calmly  appropriate  and  fix  over  for  our  own  use — often  a  very  commercial  use — 

what  we  seldom  acknowledge  and  frequently  misunderstand Go  into  any 

art  school  of  standing  and  you  will  find  ancient  sculptures,  not  modern  ones,  set 

before  students  who  are  learning  to  model  or  draw What  have  we  added 

to  this  heritage  of  beautiful  forms  ?  Nothing ;  while  in  the  effort  to  be  very 
original — having  lost  the  true  canons  of  proportion  and  knowledge  of  the  old  life 
and  its  laws — we  have  generated,  in  addition,  a  bedlam  of  bric-a-brac  that  posterity 
will  only  sweep  away." 

These  are  reflections  which  we  hardly  ever  find  applied  as  a  counterpoise  to 
modern  vanity.  We  tacitly  accept  this  position  without  venturing  to  put  it  into 
honest  expression.  All  honour  therefore  to  a  writer  who  will  say  so  explicitly 
what  is  the  barrenness  of  modern  productions. 


The  Athenaeum  Subject  Index  to  Periodicals,  191 5. — Theology  and  Philosophy. 
33  pp.,  4to.     \s.  6d. 

This  is  a  sample  of  the  various  classes  of  subject  indices  undertaken  by  the 
Athenaeum.  The  issue  of  an  annual  index  to  papers  in  periodicals  may  be  useful 
in  some  kinds  of  works ;  but  it  raises  the  question  how  far  the  world  has  time  to 
turn  back  upon  old  weeklies  and  monthlies,  most  of  the  writing  of  which  is 
ephemeral  in  its  character.  To  the  literary  man  who  delights  in  personal  detail 
as  to  the  history  of  ideas  in  the  present  time,  this  index  will  be  invaluable.  As 
a  curious  feature  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  Church  at  Rome  (here  called  "  Catholic 
Church")  has  seven  times  as  much  space  as  the  Church  of  England,  and  half  the 
papers  referred  to  about  the  English  Church  are  by  Roman  Catholic  writers. 
A  study  in  tendencies  seems  suggested  by  this  omission  of  all  the  Church  of 
England  weekly  and  monthly  papers,  and  the  elaborate  cataloguing  of  the 
"Catholic  Church  "  under  thirty-five  different  headings. 


\ 


Reviews.  93 

Notice  stir  la  vie  et  les  travaux  de  M.  Georges  Perrot. — Gaston  Maspero. 
Address  to  the  Institut  de  France.     41  pp.     191 5. 

This  biography  of  the  late  perpetual  secretary  to  the  Institut  is  a  tribute  from 
his  successor  to  tRe  memory  of  one  of  the  principal  archaeological  writers  of  the 
last  century.     He  was  born  in  1832,  and  brought  up  by  his  widowed  mother  and 
grandmother,  in  the  quiet  of  home  life,  nourished  on  the  Bible  and  the  best  of 
French  classics,  and  learning  English  from  reading  Scott.     His  grandmother  must 
have  retained  some  of  the  spirit  of  France  of  the  ancien  regime,  and  thus  contributed 
to  the  historical  sense  of  the  future  writer.     This  was  the  surrounding  to  produce 
a  scholar  and  an  antiquary.     After  a  brilliant  schooling,  he  ransacked  France  in 
walking  trips,  and  began  his  University  training  at  the  start  of  the  Second  Empire. 
The  Ultramontanes  then  in  power  determined  to  reject  him  as  a  Protestant,  and  it 
was  only  by  a  friendly    intervention    with   Napoleon    that    this    intolerance    was 
stopped.     At  twenty-three  he  succeeded  in  gaining  a  place  at  the  School  of  Athens, 
after  showing  his  ability  in  handling  ancient  inscriptions  and  modern  Greek.     In 
his  new  field  he  made  a  careful  study  of  the  inscriptions  and  history  of  Thasos ; 
after  which  he  returned  to  the  career  of  University  work  in  France.     Three  years 
there  were  cut  short  by  employment  in  the  researches  upon  the  history  of  Caesar 
for  Napoleon   HI.      In  that  his  great    work    was    the   complete    copying  of  the 
testament  of  Augustus  from  the   monument  at    Ancyra,  smothered    in    Turkish 
houses.     He  further  copied  or  took  squeezes  of  five  hundred  Greek  inscriptions, 
and  for  the  first  time  photographed  the  Hittite  monuments,  then  scarcely  known. 
When  these  delightful  days  had  to  give  place  to  routine  teaching  in  France,  he 
gave  the  classics  a  new  life  to  his  students  by  his  vivid  knowledge  of  the  sites ;  he 
also  opened  the  interest  of  archaeology  to  the  public  by  popular  writing  in  journals. 
The  blow  of  1870  fell  upon  him  in  Paris,  where  he  remained  in  his  position.     His 
spread  of  the   interest   in    his  work  resulted  in    1877  in  a  new  professorship  of 
Archaeology  at  the  Sorbonne.     Soon  after  he  met  an  architectural  enthusiast  in 
Chipiez,  and  from   1878  to   1901    they  collaborated  in    the  well-known  series  of 
volumes  on  the  archaeology  of  many  lands.     These  works  have  no  doubt  done 
much  to  put  material  before  the  public,  and  served  as  text  books  for  students. 
This  is  not  the  place  for  criticism,  but  we  may  regret  that  the  illustrations  gave  so 
incorrect  an  idea  of  ancient  art — especially  in  Egypt — and   were  mixed  with  so 
much  restoration  which  was  unfounded.     Fresh  work  came  upon  him  as  director 
of  the  Ecole  Normale,  as  editor  of  the  Revue  Archcologique,  of  the  Monuments  Piot, 
and  as  a  general   writer  on  archaeology.      He  finally  retired   from   his   mass  of 
professional  work  in  1903,  to  occupy  the  high  dignity  of  perpetual  secretary  of  the 
Academic.     In  1914,  at  the  age  of  eighty-two,  he  travelled  in  Italy  with  his  grand- 
children, and   was   looking   forward   to  his   golden    wedding    that    summer,   when 
mercifully  a  sudden  death,  amid  his  papers  in  his  study,  removed  him  on  30th  June 
before  the  horrors  of  that  autumn  were  even  anticipated. 


(    94     ) 


NOTES   AND   NEWS. 


Our  English  friends  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  the  American  Branch  has  now  been 
fully  organised,  under  the  Presidency  of  Prof.  Breasted,  who  has  long  been 
recognised  as  the  principal  Egyptologist  of  the  other  hemisphere.  The  energetic 
management  of  Dr.  Winslow  has  promoted  the  organisation,  which  includes  seven 
vice-presidents,  who  are  heads  of  Universities,  Colleges;  the  Carnegie  Museum, 
and  the  Archaeological  Institute.  In  the  large  vitality  shown  lately  in  American 
research,  it  is  well  that  our  Research  Account  has  thus  taken  a  position  which  may 
lead  to  solid  co-operation  in  the  future. 

A  few  months  ago  a  paragraph  appeared  in  the  papers  relating  to  the 
discovery  of  palaeolithic  man  in  a  cave  in  Egypt.  Now  there  is  nothing  unlikely 
in  such  a  discovery ;  it  is  a  thing  to  hope  for  and  to  expect.  Enquiries  were 
therefore  made  of  Dr.  Ferguson,  who  was  .stated  to  have  examined  the  skull.  His 
reply  is  that  the  skull  was  found  in  one  of  the  large  quarry  caverns  in  the 
Mokattam  hill ;  and  Dr.  Ferguson  found  in  the  same  place  part  of  another  skull 
with  a  small  fragment  of  iron  or  steel  bedded  in  it.  The  position  in  an  artificial 
quarry,  fixes  the  date  to  be  after  the  Ilnd  dynasty,  when  quarrying  first  began. 
Probably  both  skulls  are  of  Roman  age,  or  later. 

In  the  paper  in  the  last  number  on  "  The  End  of  the  Hittites,"  a  slip  has  been 
kindly  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Hugh  Seebohm.  In  the  discourse  of  Odysseus  to 
Alkinous,  he  was  recounting  his  previous  tale  to  Achilles,  concerning  Neoptolemos 
the  son  of  Achilles.  It  was  therefore  the  son  of  Telephos,  the  king  of  Mysia,  who 
had  the  Ketean  companions,  which  is  likely  enough  on  the  borders  of  Hittite 
power.  The  previous  wounding  of  Telephos  by  Achilles  was  what  gave  point  to 
the  tale  about  Neoptolemos  son  of  Achilles  slaying  Eurypylos  the  son  of  Telephos. 

The  safe  return  of  Dr.  Derry  to  England  for  a  short  time,  from  his 
Mediterranean  hospital  work,  has  much  gratified  his  numerous  friends. 

Lieut.  Engelbach,  R.E.,  who  left  Suvla  Bay  on  the  evacuation,  has  been  for 
some  weeks  in  Egypt ;  he  has  since  come  to  England,  and  after  some  needful  rest 
is  now  stationed  at  Newhaven. 

Second  Lieut.  Thompson,  of  the  North  Staffordshire,  is  now  in  Cairo,  at  the 
School  of  Instruction,  Zeytun. 

Second  Lieut.  North  is  also  in  Cairo. 

Second  Lieut.  Lawrence  is  on  the  Intelligence  Staff,  Cairo. 

Mr.  J.  E.  Quibell,  Curator  of  the  Cairo  Museum,  a  former  student  of  the 
Research  Account,  is  in  the  local  defence  corps  in  Egypt. 

Mrs.  Quibell — known  in  the  Research  volumes  as  Miss  Pirie — is  active  in  the 
Cairo  canteen  work. 

Mr.  Eric  Peet  is  in  service  at  Salonika,  near  Prof.  Ernest  Gardner. 


(    95     ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 


Thanks  to  Dr.  Mercer,  we  have  some  illustrations  from  the  Gorringe  Collection, 
and  perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  these  is  the  bronze  portrait  statuette  of  a 
Ptolemaic  king  on  page  51.  That  it  is  a  king  is  evident  from  the  elephant's  skin 
headdress  of  royal  form,  which  was  represented  upon  some  of  the  Ptolemaic  coins. 
That  it  is  of  the  late  Greek  period  is  clear  from  the  work.  As  such  a  figure  is  a 
new  example  of  portraiture,  Dr.  Mercer  kindly  had  a  profile  view  of  it  taken,  which 
is  here  given  as  one  of  our  portraits. 

Which  Ptolemy  this  represents  is  not  easy  to  settle.  The  earlier  kings  of  that 
dynasty  are  fairly  pourtrayed  and  recognised,  but  about  the  later  ones  there  is  a 
maze  of  uncertain  suppositions,  in  which  no  two  authorities  find  enough  ground  to 
agree.  Most  of  the  later  coins  only  repeat  the  head  of  the  founder,  Soter,  and 
portraits  are  rarely  given. 

The  age  of  this  king  is  a  main  guide :  the  sinking  round  the  cheek-bone, 
the  drawn  lines  of  the  face,  the  flabbiness  round  the  eye,  the  pinched  chin  and 
nose,  all  show  an  elderly  man,  certainly  over  fifty,  probably  about  sixty.  The 
history  is  somewhat  difficult  to  unravel,  but  from  direct  and  indirect  detail,  it 
seems  to  have  been  thus  : — 


I.  Soter     .     .     . 
II.  Philadelphos 

III.  Euergetes  I    . 

IV.  Philopator     . 
V.  Epiphanes     . 

VI.  Eupator  I 
VII.  Philometor    . 
VIII.  Eupator  II     . 
IX.  Euergetes  II 
X.  Soter  II     .     . 
XI.  Alexander  I  . 
XII.  Alexander  II 
XIII.  Neos  Dionysos 

Thus  the  choice  of  attribution  is  much  limited  by  the  age.  As  the  portrait  is 
clearly  not  Ptolemy  I,  II,  III  or  IV,  by  the  coin  portraits,  the  age  limits  the 
attribution  to  IX,  X  or  XIII,  as  all  the  others  died  a  good  deal  younger.  Of 
these  three  the  IXth,  Physkon,  was — as  his  nickname  shows — marked  by  his  gross 
size,  and  fatness  as  shown  on  the  coins,  whereas  this  king  is  spare  and  strong. 
The  conditions  of  the  Xth,  Lathyros,  agree  much  more  with  the  type  we  see  here. 
Exiled  to  Cyprus  by  a  usurper,  after  ten  years  of  reign,  he  kept  up  his  energy, 
and  eighteen  years  later,  at  the  age  of  fifty- four,  he  forced  his  way  back  to  the 
throne  of  Egypt,  and  reigned  there  seven  years  till  his  death.  He  has  the  character 
for  patience  and  amenity  along  with  good  fighting  capacity ;  and  that  would  agree 


BORN. 

REIGNED. 

DIED. 

AGE. 

B.C. 

B.C. 

B.C. 

B.C. 

367 

325 

283 

84 

308 

28s 

246 

62 

284 

246 

221 

63 

243 

221 

204 

39 

209 

204 

181 

28 

190? 

182 

181 

9? 

188 

181 

146 

42 

162 

146 

145 

17 

171 

146 

n6 

55  Physkon. 

142 

n6 

81 

6 1  Lathyros 

130? 

106 

88 

42? 

no? 

81 

81 

29? 

no? 

81 

51 

59  Auletes. 

96  The  Portraits. 

well  to  the  tyiae  we  see  here.  The  age  of  XIII,  Auletes,  would  place  him  in  the 
running ;  but  a  man  whose  luxury  and  voluptuous  life  gave  him  the  nickname  of 
"  flute-player,"  and  the  official  title  of  Neos  Dionysos,  would  scarcely  frame  to  the 
spare,  firm,  determined  old  man  we  see  here.  Not  much  doubt  then  rests  on 
attributing  this  bronze  statuette  to  Ptolemy  X  Lathyros. 

Mr.  Hill  has  kindly  allowed  casts  from  the  British  Museum  to  supply  here 
the  best  portraits  of  Ptolemy  I  Soter,  and  Ptolemy  IV.  The  Soter  head  is  the 
youngest  type,  and  is  given  to  compare  with  a  head  on  onyx  in  University  College,, 
which  has  a  bust  of  a  Graeco- Egyptian  king,  which  might  be  intended  for  Soter. 
From  the  Greek  work,  but  purely  Egyptian  headdress,  it  is  most  likely  to  be  of 
his  time.  The  head  of  Philopator  is  given  for  comparison  with  a  finger-ring  of  gilt 
bronze,  in  University  College,  which  is  certainly  of  the  same  king. 


c\ 


\^ 


GOLD  COIN.  ONYX. 

PTOLEMY  I.,  SOTER. 


GOLD  COIN.  BRONZE  RING. 

PTOLEMY  IV.,  PHILOPATOR. 


IK 


rv 


PTOLEMY     X.,     LATHYROS. 
BRONZE     FIGURE.  GORRINGE     COLLECTION. 


o 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


EARLY   FORMS   OF   THE   CROSS   FROM   EGYPTIAN   TOMBS. 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  use  of  a  cross  by  Christians  as  a  symbol  of  Christ 
the  Redeemer  did  not  come  into  general  use  until  the  time  of  Constantine.  It 
seems  to  have  been  early  in  use  by  the  Egyptians,  who  adopted  a  form  of  the  ankh, 
the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  sign  which  is  sometimes  called  "the  key  of  life,"  or  "the 
life  of  the  world  to  come,"  as  a  link  between  the  old  faith  and  the  new. 

When  the  great  temple  of  Serapis  was  solemnly  destroyed  by  order  of  the 
Emperor  Theodosius,  there  were  laid  bare  "  certain  characters  which  they  called 
hieroglyphics,  having  the  form  of  crosses."  The  Christians  claimed  these  as  evidence 
that  the  great  building  had  once  belonged  to  their  faith.  But  some  of  the 
heathen  converts  to  Christianity  who  could  read  the  ancient  writing,  interpreted  the 
inscription.  They  said  that  the  character  resembling  the  Cross  signified  in  ancient 
days  "  the  life  to  come."  They  further  declared  that  the  writing  was  a  prophecy, 
which,  being  interpreted,  meant :  "  When  the  (character  in  the  form  of  a  cross 
representing)  Life  to  come  should  appear,  the  temple  of  Serapis  would  be 
destroyed";  on  hearing  this,  a  great  number  of  the  pagans  embraced  Christianity 
and  were  baptized. 

The  crosses  which  follow  are  taken  from  early  tombstones  :  some  are  from 
churches  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  and  some  are  probably  later ;  for  as 
persecution  waxed  fierce  in  Egypt  there  came  a  tendency  so  to  disguise  the  form 
of  the  cross  that  it  should  only  be  recognizable  by  the  initiated.  The  curious 
observer  may  often  detect  these  later  concealed  crosses  in  the  ornament  of  mosques, 
showing  that  the  architect  who  designed  them  was  a  Christian. 

It  will  be  seen  that  I  have  made  no  mention  of  what  is  called  the  Tau  Cross, 
represented  in  most  of  the  modern  dictionaries  as  coming  from  Egypt.  But  this 
is  because  I  have  never  seen  it  represented  or  described  in  Egypt,  and  do  not  know 
why  it  is  represented  as  coming  from  thence.  On  the  other  hand  I  have  no  doubt 
in  my  own  mind  of  the  Egyptian  origin,  in  design,  of  the  early  crosses  found  in 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  though  most  of  these  have  the  long  shape  which  was 
(I  think  for  reasons  of  disguise)  early  abandoned  in  Egypt  for  the  square  shape. 
In  the  sacred  books  of  the  Egyptian  Church  the  cross  generally  has  the  long  shape  ; 
it  is  on  tombstones  and  mural  decorations — in  public  places — that  it  becomes 
square. 

G 


98 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


No.  I.  The  ankh,  with  an  ornament  in  the  circle,  and  Alpha  and  Omega  on 
each  side.  This  form  is,  I  think,  peculiar  to  Egypt.  I  have  met  with  the  Horus 
cross  in  Greece  and  Italy,  but  not  with  the  ankh,  or,  as  some  call  it,  the  "  key  of 
life."  Later  on,  the  arms  were  elongated,  as  in  No.  3,  and  this  was  said  to  indicate 
wings.  In  No.  2  the  aiikh  is  shown  on  either  side  of  the  cross  with  the  lock  of 
Horus  ;  while  No.  4  shows  the  ankh  supporting  three  crosses.  Nos.  5,  6,  7,  and  8, 
are  all,  I  think,  later  forms  of  the  winged  ankh. 


The  sources  of  these  are  as  follow  : — No.  2,  Cairo,  8551.  No.  3,  Cairo,  8561.. 
Nos.  7  and  8  Cairo,  8567.  No.  10,  Cairo,  8412.  No.  11,  silver  dish  from  Luqsor, 
Cairo,  7204.     Nos.  12  and  13,  on  sarcophagi  at  S.  Apollinare  in  Classe,  Ravenna. 


Early  Forms  of  the   Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


99 


No.  9.  Cross  with  the  lock  of  Horus,  denoting  the  Divine  Son  who  overcomes 
the  power  of  evil.  The  side  lock  was  in  ancient  Egypt  a  sign  of  youth,  and 
afterwards  it  became  specially  the  mark  of  Horus,  and  hence  of  noble  birth. 

This  is  a  very  early  form.  When  the  labarum  was  adopted  by  Constantine  I, 
it  seemed  to  have  been  modified  in  Egypt,  probably  at  a  later  date.  No.  10  shows 
the  standard  of  Constantine  (see  No.  47  in  Prof.  Petrie's  Italian  Crosses),  No.  11,  the 
cross  with  the  lock  of  Horus,  and  No.  13,  the  standard  with  the  loop  turned  into 
the  lock  of  Horus.  A  reference  to  the  Italian  crosses  will  show  the  identical 
design  at  Ravenna,  No.  55,  and  the  cross  with  the  lock  of  Horus,  Nos.  62  and  63, 
while  No.  64  shows  the  upright  cross  of  the  labarum  proper.  No.  12  is  the  Italian 
form. 

No.  14.  A  form  of  the  labarum  (note  the  lock  of  Horus)  encircled  with  a  bay 
wreath. 


t 


19 


-^ 


ZA 


ai 


'^^^ 


<^r^ 


24 


L 


\ 


iSi 


No.  15  is  the  late  Italian  form  on  the  foundation  stone  of  St.  Mark's  at  Venice. 

Nos.  16,  17,  18  are  a  group  of  various  forms  of  the  cross  which  occur  together 
on  a  single  Coptic  tombstone  in  the  British  Museum,  stated  to  be  of  the  seventh  or 
eighth  century. 

Nos.  19,  21,  22,  23,  and  25  show  a  different  and  more  elongated  form,  with 
spreading  ends.  These,  I  think,  are  not  earlier  than  the  sixth  and  succeeding 
centuries.  Compare  with  Nos.  20  and  24,  which  are  Italian  crosses.  No.  19  is  at 
Cairo,  8520.  No.  20  is  the  cross  held  by  Archbishop  Maximian  in  the  mosaic  at 
Ravenna,  A.D.  550.  No.  22  is  at  Cairo,  8410.  No.  23  is  a  bronze  cross  at  Cairo, 
9126.  No.  24  is  on  the  sarcophagus  at  Ravenna  of  Archbishop  Johannes,  A.D.  742, 
also  on  that  of  Archbishop  Gratiosus,  788  (repeated,  figure  132).  No.  25  is  a 
bronze  cross  from  Abu  Rowash,  Cairo,  9176. 

G  2 


ICX3 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 


Nos.  26,  28,  29,  and  30,  show  a  slightly  different  form  of  cross,  which  is  found 
everywhere  after  the  fifth  or  sixth  century.  The  ornamentation  is  inside  the  cross, 
sometimes  engraved,  sometimes  jewelled.  Compare  with  Nos.  27,  85,  98,  and  99, 
among  the  Italian  crosses.  No.  26  is  from  the  baptistery  at  Ravenna,  A.D.  450. 
No.  27  at  Cairo,  841 1.     No.  29  at  Cairo,  8423.     No.  30  at  Cairo,  7329. 

Nos.  31,  33,  34,  35,  and  36  are  all  square  crosses  set  in  circles.  The  first  two, 
in  my  opinion,  are  earlier  than  the  others,  and  may  be  compared  with  Nos.  32,  69, 
and  y6  in  the  Italian  crosses.  Nos.  34,  35,  and  36,  show  the  tendency  to  disguise 
the  symbol  of  the  Cross  which  is  apparent  in  Egypt  after  the  Mohammedan 
Conquest.     No.  32  is  from  a  sarcophagus  at  Ravenna.     No.  33  from  Ahnas,  Cairo, 

7350. 

No.  34.  Square  cross  with  four  double  circles  encircled  with  bay  wreath. 


No.  35.  Square  jewelled  cross  on  stand,  St.  Andrew's  cross  behind,  and  wreath 
of  bays. 

No.  36.  Square  jewelled  cross  set  in  jewelled  circle  and  surrounded  by  wreath 
of  bays. 

No.  37.  Square  cross  with  other  Christian  symbols.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
interesting  of  the  crosses.  It  was  found  incised  upon  a  pavement  slab  in  a  ruined 
church  ;  and  an  inscription  on  the  slab  appears  to  say  that  it  marked  the  place  of 
the  Holy  Jeremiah,  in  the  great  church  whose  ruins  Mr.  Quibell  excavated  in  the 
desert  near  Sakkarah,  and  where  among  other  things  he  found  this  cross,  which  is 
now  in  the  Cairo  Museum.  This  is  probably  the  Jeremiah  for  whom  the  Emperor 
Anastasius  built  a  huge  church  in  Egypt  early  in  the  sixth  century,  on  the  site  of 
a  small  one  which  had  been  dedicated  to  St.  Irai  (Iras). 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 


lOI 


No.  38.  Square  cross  with  four  petals  breaking  from  the  centre. 
No.  39.  Square   cross  with  leafage   ends  ;    of  the   eighth   or   ninth    century. 
(Cairo,  7299.) 

No.   40.    Square   cross,  with  three  pointed  leaves  breaking  from  the  centre 
between  the  arms,  and  surrounded  by  coil  of  three-fold  cord. 

G  3 


102  Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 

No.  41.  Cross  surmounted  by  lotus  flower ;  three-pointed  leaves  breaking  from 
the  centre.     Cairo,  8589. 

No.  42.  Concealed  cross,  set  with  the  uzait,  or  mystic  eye  of  ancient  Egypt. 

No.  43.  Tombstone  containing  three  different  crosses,  one  with  the  lock  of 
Horus,  and  one  in  the  ankh  cross.     Cairo,  8602. 

No.  44.  The  cross  which  is  most  commonly  found  on  those  restored  Egyptian 
churches  which  are  still  standing,  is  really  a  group  of  five  square  crosses,  like  the 
one  now  called  the  Jerusalem  Cross. 

E.  L.  Butcher. 


The  interesting  collection  of  forms  of  the  Cross  which  Mrs.  Butcher  has  con- 
tributed from  her  long  acquaintance  with  Egypt,  is  an  inducement  to  issue  some 
material  on  the  history  of  the  Cross,  which  I  had  collected  in  Italy,  about  fifteen 
years  ago.  The  cross  form  in  Egypt  cannot  well  be  taken  apart  from  the  history 
of  it  elsewhere,  for  the  changes  were  closely  linked  over  all  the  Roman  Empire; 
and  as  the  Italian  examples  are  better  dated  than  those  in  Egypt,  the  order  in 
course  of  time  helps  to  show  what  was  the  course  of  development.  Mrs.  Butcher 
has  already  incorporated  such  of  the  Italian  collection  as  seemed  best  to  illustrate 
the  connection  with  Egypt.  Here,  therefore,  I  shall  trace  what  may  be  seen  of 
the  history  of  the  changes  of  form,  mainly  on  the  following  Italian  examples,  with 
reference  also  to  those  which  have  preceded  this.  One  of  the  best  sources  of 
dating  is  the  series  of  dated  inscriptions  in  the  Lateran  Museum,  many  of  which 
have  a  cross.  It  might  be  supposed  that  so  obvious  a  subject  had  been  exhausted 
already.  But — to  say  nothing  of  various  fanciful  works — the  treatise  of  Didron 
lumps  all  crosses  before  the  eighth  century  as  "of  the  earliest  period,"  while  spending 
pages  upon  useless  quotations  of  poetry. 

The  earliest  Christian  symbol  which  can  be  dated  is  not  the  Cross,  but  the 
XP  monogram  (Nos.  45,  46).  There  is  no  question  that  this  is  the  military  labarum 
sign  found  on  the  Roman  coinage  as  the  standard,  from  Constantine  onwards. 
This  complicates  the  question  as  to  the  Vision  of  the  Cross.  The  narrative  of 
Constantine's  vision  closely  agrees  with  the  well-known  parhelion,  a  cross  of  light 
radiating  from  the  sun  and  extending  to  a  circular  halo.  The  vision  was  in  the 
autumn,  near  the  Alps,  where  frosty  air  would  naturally  supply  the  material  of  a 
parhelion.  Another  parhelion  of  the  same  kind  is  claimed  to  have  been  seen  at 
Jerusalem  in  the  next  generation.  I  have  even  seen  a  mock  sun  —  the  most  visible 
portion  of  a  parhelion — in  Middle  Egypt.  We  should  have  expected  the  ensign 
to  be  a  vertical  cross  in  a  circle ;  but  this  form  does  not  appear  in  use  until  a 
century  later  (Nos.  61  and  69,  A.D.  425). 

The  earliest  form  is  the  monogram  of  XP,  and  it  seems  as  if  there  was  some  special 
reason  for  Constantine  not  adopting  the  cross,  but  taking  instead  the  two  leading 
letters  of  XPIZTOZ,  perhaps  with  some  secondary  meaning.  Earlier  occurrences 
of  this  monogram  have  been  noted  on  coins  of  Tarentum  and  Bactria ;  but  it  is  so 
likely  a  monogram  to  occur  for  many  words  and  names  formed  from  y^pvao'^, 
that  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  it  has  a  religious  meaning  before  Constantine. 
The  earliest  example  as  a  Christian  symbol  is  said  to  be  of  A.D.  323.  Here,  in 
No.  45,  is  one  dated  to  A.D.  331,  in  No.  46  one  of  A.D.  341,  and  there  are  other 
instances  in  the  Lateran  of  A.D.  353.  358  (two),  3*32,  and  382.  (On  the  labarum, 
see  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury,  II,  p.  567.) 


Early  Forms  of  the   Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


103 


The  monogram  on  coins  of  Constans  (about  a.d.  340)  is  No.  47.  The  same 
is  on  coins  of  Nepotianus,  A.D.  350.  No.  48  is  from  coins  of  Constantius  II,  a.d.  350, 
and  Jovianus  A.D.  363  ;  and  with  A,  W,  used  by  Magnentius  A.D.  350.  At  about 
the  same  date  it  is  found  placed  in  a  wreath  on  sarcophagi  in  the  Lateran  (Nos.  50,  5 1). 
A  degraded  form,  No.  52,  also  occurs.     The  type  continues  with  the  next  century. 


LATERAN,  A.D.  33I. 


T.ATERAN,  34I 


CONSTANS,  340. 


CONSTANTIVS,  350.      MAGNENTIVS,  350. 


LATERAN,  350? 


LATERAN,  35O? 


LATERAN,  379. 


PLACIDIA,  420. 


ANTHEMIVS,  470. 


under  Galla  Placidia,  A.D.  420  (No.  53),  and  Anthemius,  a.d.  470 (No.  54).  Placed  in 
a  wreath  (No.  55)  it  also  occurs  in  the  tomb  of  Galla  Placidia.  Curious  variations 
of  monogram  with  a  cross  (No.  56)  begin  at  S.  Agata,  Ravenna,  in  A.D.  430;  these 
are  found  at  Salonika  (No.  57);  S.  Vitale,  Ravenna  (No.  58),  in  a.d.  546,  and, 
perhaps,  a  century  or  two  later  at  S.  ApoUinare  in  Classe  (No.  59). 


PLACIDIA,  440. 


S.  AGATA,  430. 
T7  56 


SALONIKA,  V  CENT. 


S.  VITAI.E,  546. 


RAVENNA. 


60 


SPOLETO,  350?  PLACIDIA,  455?  THEOUORIC,  500?  RAVENNA,  560.  FELICIVS,  725. 

The  second  form  to  appear  was  the  Cross  with  a  loop  at  the  top,  generally 
considered  to  be  the  P  of  XPIZTOZ,  the  X  being  identified  with  the  Cross ; 
No.  60  is  of  about  A.D.  350,  from  S.  Agostino  at  Spoleto.     Soon  after,  this  form 

G  4 


104 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 


appears  as  a  recurved  hook,  No.  6i,  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Honorius,  A.D.  425,  or, 
more  probably,  of  Valentinian  III,  A.D.  455  ;  No.  62,  of  Theodoric,  about  A.D.  500; 
No.  63,  from  S.  ApoUinare  Nuovo,  at  Ravenna,  A.D.  560;  No.  12,  of  about  the 
same  age,  on  a  sarcophagus  at  S.  ApoUinare  in  Classe.  Now  this  was  a  staple 
form  in  Egypt,  and  it  has  been,  with  good  reason,  regarded  as  the  lock  of  Horus 
attached  to  the  Cross,  an  emblem  of  the  Divine  Son.  No  Egyptian  examples  can 
be  dated  as  early  as  the  fourth  century,  hence  the  form  No.  60  seems  to  be  the 
earlier.  The  Egyptian  type  is  probably,  therefore,  an  adaptation,  but  one  which 
was  spread  largely  in  Italy,  along  with  much  else  of  Egyptian  Christianity.  This 
modification  was  also  applied  to  the  XP  monogram,  as  in  No.  55,  from  the  tomb 
of  Galla  Placidia,  A.D.  440. 

GRATIAN,  380.      GLYCERIVS,'*473.  PLACIDIA,  45S  ?  S.  SABINA,  425.  S.  GIOVANNI,  RAV.  423. 


t 


65 


u 


73 


S.  SABINA,  430. 


PLACIDIA,  440.      VALENTINIAN  III,  44O.      EUDOCIA,  44O. 


+ 


LATKRAN,  450. 


We  now  reach  the  appearance  of  the  plain  cross.  So  far,  a  monogram  of  some 
kind  had  been  the  public  emblem,  and  it  is  not  till  A.D.  380  that  the  Cross  appears 
on  the  coinage,  as  No.  65,  of  Gratian.  We  do  not  know  what  the  form  was  of  the 
cross  which  is  said  to  have  been  held  by  the  statue  of  Constantine,  or  of  that 
which  he  set  up  at  Constantinople,  or  of  the  gold  cross  which  he  laid  on  the 
sarcophagus  of  St.  Peter  (last  seen  when  laying  the  foundations  of  the  present 
basilica) — all  these  are  unknown.  But,  so  far  as  the  coinage  and  the  labarum  on 
the  coins  show,  the  plain  cross  appears  in  A.D.  380 ;  it  is  next  found  in  A.D.  420  on 
the  tomb  of  Galla  Placidia  (No.  66) ;  then  (elongated  above)  on  the  sarcophagus 
of  Valentinian  III  (No.  67).  After  that  it  is  found  jewelled  for  the  first  time  in 
A.D.  425.at  Sta.  Sabina  (No.  68),  and,  at  the  same  time,  placed  in  a  wreath  (No.  6g) 
at  S.  Giovanni,  Ravenna.  The  XP  monogram  in  a  wreath  occurs  rather  later 
(No.  32)  on  a  sarcophagus  at  Ravenna. 

Another  modification  seen  on  coinage  is  placing  a  cross  on  a  globe.  This  first 
appears  under  Valentinian  1 1 1  at  about  A.D.  440 ;  and  an  example  borrowed  from 
the  same  design  is  No.  73  of  Licinia  Eudocia,  about  A.D.  450.  Other  examples  of 
the  simple  cross  are.  No.  70  from  Sta.  Sabina  in  A.D.  430,  No.  71  from  the  tomb  of 
Galla  Placidia  in  A.D.  440,  No.  72  from  a  coin  of  Valentinian  III,  about  A.D.  440; 
and  No.  74  from  the  Lateran,  about  A.D.  450. 


Early  Forms  of  the   Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


105 


The  simple  cross  was  continued  in  the  baptistery  of  Ravenna,  A.D.  450  (No.  75). 
The  equilateral  cross,  or  Greek  cross,  an  old  Mykenaean  emblem,  was  accepted 
(No.  76)  at  S.  Stefano,  Rome,  between  A.D.  440  and  461.  A  cross  with  a  long 
twisted  stem  (?To.  jy)  appears  on  the  coins  of  Petronius  Maximus  (a.d.  455),  and  of 
Anthemius  (a.d.  467).  The  beginning  of  ornamenting  the  angles  is  seen  at  the 
Lateran  (No.  78)  dated  to  A.D.  461,  and  on  the  coins  of  Olybrius  (No.  79)  of  A.D.  472. 
It  is  notable  that  all  of  these  crosses  on  coins  belong  to  the  Italian  Emperor  and 
not  to  Constantinople.  The  jewelled  cross,  which  was  started  at  A.D.  425,  appears 
again  about  A.D.  500  in  S.  Apollinare  Nuovo,  at  Ravenna  (No.  81),  and  the  Arian 
Baptistery  about  A.D.  510  (No.  82). 


RAVENNA,  450. 


S.  STEFANO,  45c.  PETRONIVS,  455.      LATERAN,  46I.  OLYBRIVS,  472. 


T 


OLYBRIVS,  472.  RAVENNA,  500? 


ZA 


RAVENNA,  510?     LATERAN,  519.     S.  CLEMENTE,  52O. 


S.  CLEMENTE,  520.      THEODORIC,  52O.     RAVENNA,  52O.     S.  CLEMENTE,  525.       MURANO,  53O? 

S6        V 7      86 

89 


[r 


i  \ 


94 


PARENZO,  540. 


PARENZO,  540. 


S.  VITALE,  546.  S.  VITALE,  546.  S.  VITALE,  546. 


A  tendency  to  widen  the  stem  and  arms  to  the  end,  came  in  at  A.D.  520  at 
S.  Clemente,  Rome  (No.  85)  and  the  tomb  of  Theodoric  at  Ravenna  (No.  86). 
Otherwise  the  fashion  led  to  long  thin  parallel  limbs  with  a  sudden  widening  at  the 
ends,  as  at  the  Arian  Baptistery,  Ravenna  (No.  87),  S.  Clemente,  Rome,  a.d.  525 


io6 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


(No.  88),  S.  Donate  at  Murano,  a.d.  530?  (No.  89),  and  S.  Vitale,  Ravenna,  A.D.  546, 
(Nos.  92,  93,  94).  The  plain-limbed  cross  appears — perhaps  under  Greek  influence — 
at  Parenzo  in  A.D.  540  (Nos.  90,  91). 

At  this  point  begins  the  decoration  of  the  cross  with  various  jewel  patterns. 
The  earlier  jewelling  was  in  restrained  regularity,  in  accord  with  Latin  feeling ; 
the  later  jewelling  is  more  of  Oriental  character,  spotty  and  irregular,  as  No.  95 
of  S.  Vitale,  A.D.  546 ;  the  cross  of  Theudelinda  A.D.  589  (No.  98),  and  the  similar 
cross  of  Receswinth  in  A.D.  670  (No.  99).  A  curious  instance  of  the  cross  is  in  the 
pattern  of  the  bronze  grating  of  the  crypt  of  S.  Apollinare  in  Classe,  of  A.D.  549 
(No.  96).  The  widening  of  the  top  is  like  the  contemporary  cross  on  the  ivory 
throne  of  Maxim  ian  in  S.  Vitale  (No.  97). 


S.  VITALE,  546.        RAVENNA,  549.  RAVENNA,  55O.         THEUDELINDA,  589. 


RBCBSVINTHDS,  67O. 
99 


LATERAN,  S57.      S.  LORENZO,  578.      S.  AGNESE,  63O.      VOLPICELLA,  712.      VOLPICELLA,  712- 


PAVIA,  720. 


The  addition  of  cross  bars  at  the  end  of  the  limbs  of  the  cross  first  appears  in 
A.D.  557  at  the  Lateran  (No.  lOo);  rather  later,  at  S.  Lorenzo,  Rome,  A.D.  578 
(No.  loi),  and  Sta.  Agnese,  Rome,  in  a.d.  630  (No.  102).  This  grew  into  almost 
a  square  enclosure  around  the  cross,  and  was  usual  on  the  Byzantine  coinage  in  the 
seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  centuries.  The  splayed  cross  (No.  103)  at  S.  Giorgio, 
Volpicella,  of  A.D.  712,  is  a  clumsier  form  of  that  of  Maximian  (No.  97).  The 
two  incised  crosses  of  A.D.  7 1 2,  Volpicella  (No.  104),  and  A.D.  720,  Pavia  (No.  105), 
are  of  similar  style. 

The  same  style  recurs  again  in  A.D.  780  at  S.  Vincenzo,  Milan  (No.  108),  and 
in  A.D.  825  at  Sta.  Sabina,  Rome  (No.  1 1 1).  The  thick-limbed  cross  was  generally 
in  favour  in  the  later  eighth  century  and  the  ninth.  The  jewelling  is  much  coarser 
than  before,  as  on  the  fragments  of  Sta.  Maria  d'Aurona  at  Milan  of  A.D.  740 
(No.  107),  and  the  cross  of  Berengarius  at  Monza,  about  A.D.  915  (No.  116).  The 
fleur-de-Hs  terminals  of  the  cross  of  S.  Satiro  at  Milan  (No.  1 14)  are  surprising  for 
the  date  of  A.D.  879. 

Here  we  may  pause,  at  a  break  in  the  regular  development,  to  note  a  remark- 
able type  which  was  peculiar  to  Egypt,  having  a  disc  at  the  top  of  the  cross  arms. 
Mrs.  Butcher  has  brought  together  a  series  of  strange  forms,  Nos.  3  to  8.  No.  i 
may  well  have  been  a  modified  onkh  sign,  with  its  round  head.  In  No.  2  there  is 
the  onkh  quite  distinct  from  the  cross.  But  in  Nos.  3  to  8  we  have  a  type  which 
cannot  have  come  altogether  from  the  onkh  and  cross,  as  the  growth  of  the  sides  is 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 


107 


so  marked.     There  was,  however,  in  North  Africa  a  most  sacred  emblem,  that  of 
the  Punic  supreme  goddess,  Tanith,  shown  here  in  Nos.  1 17  to  120.     In  this  we  see 


RAVENNA 
FELICIVS,  725. 


MILAN,  740. 


MILAN,  780. 


ELEVCHADIVS,  8lO. 


BUDRIO,  8.0.  =■  ^"fll^^ 


^^^xi 


(10 


^ 


^  Ooaf  Q^tacxpB 


116 


BOLOGNA,  840.      S.  VITALE,  BOLOGNA,  850.       MILAN,  879.      S.  DONATO,  MURANO,  880.       MONZA,  915? 

the  wide  arms  turning  upward,  as  in  Nos.  4  and  5,  and  the  splaying  bases,  as  in 
Nos.  3  and  6  especially.  It  seems  that  these  crosses— for  they  are  undoubtedly 
Christian — have  conformed  as  much  to  the  claims  of  Tanith  as  to  the  onkh.  How 
far  the  emblem  of  Tanith  may  have  been  derived  from  the  onkh  originally  we  need 
not  here  enquire.  Sufficient  is  it  that  the  two  were  quite  independent  when  the 
Cross  appeared,  and  that  both  influences  modified  the  development  of  the  Cross  in 
Egypt. 

EMBLEMS  OF  TANITH,   CARTHAGINIAN. 


Sr:   n  (Q)  n 


ARIAN   CROSSES   AT   RAVENNA,    5IO;     AND   ALSO  TORCELLO,    520. 

The  ornate  type  has  been  passed  over  in  our  historical  series,  as  being  a  group 
by  itself  which  we  can  best  regard  as  a  whole.  The  beginning  of  the  elaborate 
ornament  is  in  the  Arian  crosses  at  Ravenna  of  A.D.  510,  Nos.  121  to  124.  The 
symbolism  of  the  hand  in  the  centre,  in  the  last  one,  is  a  recognized  symbol  of  God 
the  Father.     These  crosses  all  end  in  discs  at  each  extremity,  a  feature   quite 


io8 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian   Tombs. 


unknown  before  in  the  Italian  cross.     It  seems  as  if  it  were  influenced  by  the  onkh 
and  Tanith  symbols,  Nos.  i  to  8. 

The  crosses  with  decorated  terminations  begin  at  about  A.D.  550  (No.  125)  as 
on  an  altar  at  S.  Vitale,  and  at  S.  Lorenzo  at  Rome  about  A.D.  578.  At  the  same 
place  and  date  such  a  cross  has  the  A  and  W  hanging  from  the  arms  (No.  126). 
In  the  next  century  this  termination  affects  a  jewelled  cross,  in  the  mosaic  of 
Primus  Felicianus,  at  S.  Stefano  Rotondo,  Rome  (No.  127),  or  forms  close  spirals 
at  the  ends  as  at  S.  Georgio  in  Velabro,  Rome,  of  A.D.  682  (No.  128).  This  was 
continued  into  the  age  of  the  twisted  patterns,  as  No.  129  at  S.  Pietro,  Toscanella,  of 
A.D.  739.  Recurved  hook  ends  appear  on  the  latest  of  the  jewelled  crosses  (No.  130) 
on  the  altar  of  Ratchis  at  Cividale  in  A.D.  745. 


tJ   V> 


S.    LORENZO,    ROME,    578. 
126 


TOSCANELLA,   739. 


12S 


4 


i 


r 


127 


S.    VITALE,  ROME, 

RAVENNA,    550?  VII  CENT. 


ROME,   682?  CIVIDALE,    745, 


PAI.ENQUE. 


Here  we  may  compare  No.  131,  which,  by  the  form  of  its  terminals,  would 
naturally  belong  to  the  group  of  these  crosses  of  the  seventh  century.  The  form  of 
the  foliation  on  the  stem  of  the  cross  also  belongs  to  about  the  same  period, 
agreeing  with  a  well-known  style  of  about  the  eighth  century,  which  may  be 
compared  in  the  stem  pattern  of  the  cross  of  Peltrudis  at  Cividale,  placed  at  the 
side  here.  No.  131  is  the  celebrated  cross  of  Palenque  in  Central  America,  there 
placed  between  two  worshippers  who  stand  adoring.  At  first  sight  the  distance, 
and  difference  of  surroundings,  would  seem  to  make  any  connection  impossible; 
yet  as  the  resemblance  is  purely  decorative,  it  belongs  to  the  best  evidences  of 
actual  copying,  unlike  structural  and  utilitarian  forms  which  may  arise  out  of  the 
same  conditions  and  necessities.  The  purely  artistic  forms  are  always  the  best 
evidence  of  real  connection.  As  this  belongs  to  the  type  of  cross  in  fashion  in  the 
seventh  and  eighth  centuries,  it  would  readily  be  the  form  carried  by  the  Syrian 
mission  *o  China,  which  began  in  A.D.  638,  and  was  commemorated  in  the 
Si-ngan-fu  inscription  of  A.D.  781.  It  is  not  impossible  to  suppose  that  a  mission 
which  had  penetrated  across  the  continent  of  Asia,  from  Syria  to  China,  should 
have  grasped  at  any  hint  of  lands  known  beyond,  and  have  penetrated  by  some 
means  across  to  America.  As  the  best  opinion  on  Palenque  is  that  it  belongs  to 
the  twelfth  century  A.D.,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  transmission  from  China  to 
America  within  the  compass  of  three  centuries.  Certainly,  future  discussions  of 
the  source  of  the  Palenque  cross  must  take  into  account  the  connections  of  its 
ornament  with  that  of  the  eighth  century. 


Early  Forms  of  the  Cross  from  Egyptian  Tombs. 


109 


The  twisted  pattern — of  northern  origin — continued  to  be  the  usual  decoration 
of  crosses  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries,  as  Nos.  133  to  139,  generally  with 
spiral  ornament  of  the  terminals. 


RAVENNA 

lOHANNES,  742. 

or®  132 


*. 


CIVIDALE,    770. 


S.    MARIA  COSM. 
ROME,    785. 


SS.    APOSTOLI, 
ROME,    7S5. 


135 


S.    SABINA,    ROME,   SOJ.  ELEVCHADIVS,    RAV.    8lO.      S.    SABINA,    ROME,   82?.         ^'    MARIA,   TRASTEV, 

'  '        ^  .  >         J  ROME,    827. 

In  A.D.  830  a  new  development  appeared  in  an  upper  cross  arm,  probably 
derived  from  the  idea  of  the  tablet  of  Pilate  attached  to  the  head  of  the  Cross. 
The  coins  of  Theophilus  first  show  this  (No.  140).  It  was  modified  as  a  double  cross 
(No.  141),  or  with  a  long  stem  (No.  142)  in  915.  Next,  under  Basil  II,  A.D.  1000, 
a  cross  piece  was  added  to  each  terminal,  and  a  diagonal  cross  in  the  middle 
(No.  143) ;  or  the  diagonal  cross  was  added  to  a  double  cross  (No.  144).  Here  we 
reach  the  many  fancy  varieties  of  form  which  blossomed  in  the  Latin  kingdoms  of 
the  East,  and  which  by  their  variety  and  intricacy  of  ornament  cease  to  have  clear 
lines  of  descent. 


1^ 


140 


I>^ 


M 


J.     HI  ^^    1. 


j 


143 


\^^^ 


THEOPHILUS,    830. 


THEODORA,   83O. 


ZOE,   915. 


BASIL   11,    1000. 


BASIL   n,    A.D.    1000. 


Much  more  research  is  needed  to  follow  each  of  the  changes  back  to  its  real 
source  ;  but  this  outline  of  dated  examples  will  serve  to  show  how  various  types  were 
connected,  and  help  toward  dating  monuments  which  bear  figures  of  the  Cross. 


W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 
[This  article  may  be  obtained  in  separate  form,  price  \s.  6d.] 


C     no    ) 


CUTTING    GRANITE. 

The  apparent  ease  with  which  the  ancients  not  only  handled  but  cut  so  stubborn 
a  material  as  granite,  whether  the  pieces  were  large  or  small,  can  never  fail  to 
excite  interest  in  those  who  have  either  visited  the  quarries  at  Aswcin  or 
examined  the  objects,  large  or  small,  which  are  still  so  common  in  Egypt  or  in 
museums. 

It  is  not  proposed  in  this  short  paper  to  show  "how  it  was  done"  by  the 
ancients,  but  merely  to  offer  a  few  suggestions,  and,  by  describing  how  the  cutting 
has  recently  been  accomplished,  to  demonstrate  that  the  mysterious  powers  with 
which  certain  archaeologists  have  been  pleased  to  clothe  the  ancient  craftsmen 
may  be  after  all  quite  imaginary. 

Aswan  granite  is  not  very  particularly  hard  as  amongst  granites.  It  presents 
the  same  conditions  to  the  craftsman  that  are  found  in  dealing  with  granites  from 
most  other  localities.  We  can  see  for  ourselves  that  the  ancients  divided  the 
stone  by  means  of  wedges.  What  was  the  nature  of  the  wedges  employed  is  not 
so  clear,  nor  the  way  in  which  they  were  made  to  fulfil  their  office.  Some  would 
have  it  that  wooden  wedges  swelled  by  moisture  were  used  ;  others  that  metal  was 
the  material  made  use  of,  and  then  the  question  follows  :  "  What  metal  ? "  Others 
again  suggest  that  fire  was  the  agent  and  not  wedges.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
the  archaeologist,  both  of  older  date  and  of  the  present  time,  is  often  given  to 
speculate  on  technical  subjects,  and  even  to  lay  down  the  law  on  matters  of  which 
he  has  not  the  least  practical  knowledge ;  hence  follow  remarkable  results  more 
amusing  than  edifying.     May  I  myself  be  saved  from  falling  into  such  a  snare  ! 

The  object  I  have  in  view  is  to  show  how  easy  it  was  to  cut  large  blocks  of 
granite,  and  to  prepare  them  for  building  operations  in  connection  with  the  Great 
Dam  at  Asw&n.  Here  was  the  same  granite  as  was  made  use  of  by  the  ancients  : 
here  were  large  masses  of  the  material  under  the  same  conditions  as  the  masons 
had  to  deal  with  5000  years  ago,  and  the  same  lack  of  what  we  now  call  "  tackle  " 
to  assist  the  masons  in  moving  the  blocks. 

The  work  about  to  be  described  was,  as  far  as  work  on  granite  in  Egypt  was 
concerned,  somewhat  experimental,  and  taken  in  hand  so  as  to  test  the  facility  of 
"  getting,"  and  the  cost  of  cutting  the  material :  things  most  important  to  be 
known  in  calculating  the  cost  of  the  colossal  work  of  building  the  Dam. 

I  am  so  fortunate  as  to  have  at  hand  a  full  account  of  the  proceedings  given 
me  by  Mr.  Courtney  Clifton,  under  whose  general  direction,  acting  on  behalf  of 
the  Public  Works  Department,  the  experimental  work  was  conducted  in  the 
year  1895. 

The  stonecutters  for  the  experiment  were  brought  direct  from  Baveno  in 
N.  Italy,  where  are  very  extensive  granite  quarries.  They  found  the  granite  but 
very  little  harder  than  the  granite  they  were  accustomed  to  work.  Very  large 
boulders  were  selected  on  the  island  of  El-Hesseh,  S.E.  of  Philae.  The  blocks 
required  were  large,  10  feet  long,  3  feet  4  inches  wide,  and  i  foot  8  inches  thick, 
weighing  four  tons.  Smaller  blocks  weighing  3  tons  each  were  also  required.  To 
get  these  blocks,  a  great  boulder  was  chosen.     This  was  divided  by  a  vertical  cut 


Cuttins:  Granite. 


II I 


"  E  "  "  F  "  (see  Fig.  2),  some  20  feet  in  length,  passing  along  the  top  and  two  sides. 
This,  the  first  cut  that  was  made,  employed  eighty  "  plugs  "  or  small  wedges,  and 
three  groups  of  four  heavy  wedges.  Each  "  group "  consisted  of  two  pairs  of 
wedges  placed  si^Je  by  side.  The  position  of  these  "  groups  "  is  clearly  seen  on  the 
photograph.  Fig.  i.  The  holes  to  receive  the  "  plugs"  were  made  with  a  form  of 
chisel,  known  as  a  "  point,"  with  which,  also,  dressing  of  the  surfaces  of  the  stones 
was  done  ;  the  "  point "  was,  in  fact,  the  only  cutting  tool  used. 


Pig.  I.     Granite  Boulder  at  Aswan,  Split  by  Wedge  Holes. 

The  "  points "  were  made  on  the  spot  from  an  hexagonal  steel  bar  about 
I  inch  diameter  ;  6  inches  in  length  of  the  bar  were  cut  off  and  drawn  out  by  the 
smith  to  a  blunt  point.  When  ready  for  use,  the  "  points "  had  become  about 
8  inches  long,  and  had  been  case-hardened  or  tempered,  as  to  their  tips,  by  being 
plunged  when  red  hot  in  cold  water.  The  holes  to  receive  the  "plugs"  were  cut 
with  such  a  "  point,"  struck  by  an  ordinary  hand  hammer  about  6  lbs.  in  weight. 
The  holes  were  from  3  to  4  inches  apart  and  3  to  4  inches  deep  and  |  inch  diameter. 

My  friend  Mr.  Clifton  here  makes  a  note  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
plug  holes  were  quite  unlike  the  holes  we  see  in  the  ancient  quarries  which  are 
oblong,  some  5  inches  long  and  2  inches  or  more  wide.  The  photograph.  Fig.  i, 
shows  how  numerous  and  small  the  plug  holes  are. 


112 


Cutting  Granite. 


A  shallow  groove  was  made,  to  indicate  the  line  wherein  the  plug  holes  should 
be  sunk.  This  groove  was  cut  through  the  hard  skin  formed  by  the  action  of  the 
weather  on  the  outside  of  the  boulder.  The  few  heavy  wedges,  before  mentioned, 
were  made  of  steel.  These  were  about  15  inches  long,  2i  to  3  inches  wide,  and 
weighed  some  20  lbs.  The  position  in  which  they  were  employed  is  clearly  seen 
on  the  photograph.  Fig.  i.  The  large  boulder  was  to  be  divided  in  the  manner 
shown  on  the  diagram,  Fig.  2  ;  only  as  much  as  was  required  to  form  the  blocks 
of  stone  mentioned  on  p.  no  was  to  be  cut  off  from  it.  The  piece  "G"  was  left 
standing.  The  lower  part  of  the  boulder  was  sunk  to  a  considerable  depth  in  the 
alluvium  which  had  collected  about  the  base.  This  was  dug  away  on  the  side  on 
which  the  masons  were  to  work,  so  that,  when  divided,  the  detached  part  would 
roll  over  and  rest  in  the  hole  there  prepared.  Having  all  things  thus  made  ready, 
we  now  proceed  to  the  business  of  cutting  the  boulder. 


E 


aROUND 


LCVEL 


Fig.  2.    Modern  Mode  of  Splitting  Granitb  Boulders,  Aswan. 


The  "plugs"  are  placed  in  the  holes  prepared,  into  which  they  are  jammed 
with  a  hand  hammer.  When  fixed,  they  are  struck  in  succession  by  two  men 
swinging  sledge  hammers,  each  "plug"  receiving  one  blow.  When  this  succession  of 
blows  has  been  repeated  three  or  four  times,  the  fracture  is  probably  completed  and 
the  mass  detached.  Sometimes,  however,  the  crack  does  not  follow  the  groove  and 
line  intended.  As  soon  as  this  deviation  is  observed,  the  strikers  break  off  the 
succession  of  blows  and  start  again  on  a  "  plug  "  at  some  distance  ahead.  From 
the  newly  selected  "  plug  "  they  work  backwards  along  the  groove,  thus  drawing 
the  line  of  intended  cleavage  in  the  direction  desired. 

When  the  fracture  was  completed,  the  detached  portion  of  the  boulder,  weighing 
some  fifty  or  sixty  tons,  toppled  over  into  the  position  prepared  for  it  by  digging 
the  before-mentioned  hole.  See  diagram.  Fig.  2.  Pieces  "A,  B,  C,  D"  were  cut  off 
from  the  fallen  mass,  making  use  of  the  processes  above  described  to  effect  the 
subdivision. 


Cutting  Granite.  1 13 

"  Dressing  "  the  surface  of  the  blocks  is  done  by  a  rather  heavy  tool  of  metal, 
not  altogether  unlike  an  adze,  but  its  sharp  end  serrated.  This  tool  is  let  fall 
vertically  on  to  the  surface  of  the  stone,  and  by  it  all  inequalities  are  removed. 
The  marks  which  this  tool  leaves  on  the  granite  are  much  like  those  we  see  on 
certain  unfinished'statuettes  in  the  Cairo  Museum. 

The  blocks,  some  of  them  weighing  10  tons  apiece,  were  moved  by  the 
Italian  workmen  with  ease.  Wooden  rollers,  crowbars  and  a  few  screwjacks  were 
employed.  The  rollers,  6  or  8  inches  diameter,  were  revolved  by  means  of 
crowbars  put  into  holes  prepared  near  the  ends  of  the  rollers.  The  crowbars  were 
in  the  same  relation  to  the  rollers  as  are  the  spokes  to  the  axle  of  a  wheel.  The 
metal  tool  above  referred  to  is  made  use  of  in  nearly  all  European  countries  where 
hard  stone  has  to  be  dealt  with. 

Mr.  Clifton  calls  attention  to  the  width  of  the  holes  cut  by  the  ancients. 
There  is  a  very  well  known  way  by  which  a  wedge,  by  no  means  thick,  is  made  to 
operate  in  a  hole  considerably  wider  than  itself.  This  use  of  the  wedge  is  known 
as  "  wedge  and  feather."  Two  plates  of  metal  are  inserted  in  the  hole  and  the 
wedge  is  driven  down  between  them:  friction  with  the  side  of  the  prepared  hole  is 
thus  avoided.     Did  the  ancients  make  use  of  this  device  ? 

From  what  I  have  stated  above,  it  is  clear  that  great  force  is  not  required  to 
split  even  a  large  boulder  of  granite.  When  we  look  at  the  section,  given  on  the 
diagram  Fig.  2  (not  drawn  to  scale),  it  seems  rather  difficult  to  realize  that 
anything  so  skin  deep  as  the  wedges  can  produce  so  great  a  result.  The  vertical 
measurement  from  "  E  "  to  "  F,"  Fig.  2,  was  about  16  feet,  in  parts  even  more. 

SoMERs  Clarke. 


[Extract  of  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Bertha  Broadwood,  August  8,  191 1. — "You  may 
like  to  know  what  /  saw  being  done  on  the  very  smooth  surface  of  some  of  the 
remarkable  granite  hills  in  S.  India,  December,  1883,  not  very  far  from  Shravana 
Belagola  in  Mysore.  The  notclud edges  of  the  granite  blocks  dL^di  posts  with  which 
everything  there  is  made,  from  temples  and  bridges  to  telegraph  poles,  puzzled  me 
greatly,  until  I  came  upon  a  man  making  granite  posts  by  the  following  process : — 
A  line  of  small  hollows  is  worked  in  a  smooth  surface  of  rock ;  a  little  straw  is 
burnt  over  the  hollows,  a  cupful  of  water  is  poured  in,  and  the  rock  splits  along 
the  grooved  line  of  hollows  to  the  depth  of  several  inches.  To  the  best  of  my 
recollection,  when  two  splits  had  been  made  at  the  desired  distance  apart,  usually 
about  14  inches,  the  granite  slab  about  5  inches  thick  was  just  lifted  from  its  bed 
by  a  crowbar  ;  the  granite  of  S.  India  tends  to  split  horizontally."  Mrs.  Broadwood 
had  supplied  part  of  this  account  to  Murray's  Handbook  of  India,  1891. 

The  use  of  the  "  feathers,"  or  slips  of  sheet  metal,  put  on  each  side  of  the 
wedge,  is  to  prevent  the  entry  of  the  wedge  crushing  and  grinding  the  edges  of  the 
stone  grooves,  which  would  waste  the  force  used  in  merely  enlarging  the  hole. 
The  "feathers"  spread  the  pressure  without  any  rubbing  of  the  stone,  so  that  the 
expansion  of  the  driven  wedge  all  tells  in  straining  the  stone  to  splitting  point. 
"Feathers"  were  used  in  Roman  times,  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  them  earlier. 
The  grooves  and  deeper  holes  cut  in  ancient  granite  work  never  show  any  trace  of 
metal  on  the  sides,  nor  any  crushing  due  to  pressure.  The  Indian  system  of  heating 
and  water  chilling,  agrees  better  than  any  other  process  to  the  remains  of  Egyptian 
working. — W.  M.  F.  P.] 

H 


(     H4    ) 


NEW    PORTIONS   OF   THE   ANNALS. 

(See  diagram  at  the  end  of  this  paper.) 

For  several  years  past,  students  have  been  tantalized  by  hearing  of  fresh  pieces 
of  the  Egyptian  Annals,  like  the  Palermo  stone,  lying  in  the  Cairo  Museum 
unpublished.  Though  purchased  in  1910,  it  is  not  till  191 5  that  anyone  is  allowed 
to  study  them.  After  waiting  so  long,  it  is  disappointing  to  find  that,  in  so 
expensive  a  form  of  publication,  the  reproductions  are  quite  inadequate.  Too 
small  and  indistinct,  the  plates  will  be  useless  whenever  a  proper  edition  is  issued : 
and  yet  this  is  at  a  cost  of  three  or  four  times  the  amount  for  which  results  are 
published  elsewhere. 

The  main  slab  now  published  is  about  the  size  of  that  of  Palermo,  but  is 
unhappily  so  much  worn  that  only  about  a  quarter  of  it  can  be  satisfactorily  read. 
At  the  first  view  it  adds  many  important  facts  of  that  great  document,  which  will 
be  the  foundation  of  Egyptian  history,  if  ever  it  can  be  recovered. 

First,  the  cartouche  is  used  as  early  as  the  third  king  of  the  1st  dynasty. 
This  is  long  before  it  has  been  found  hitherto,  the  earliest  being  probably  that  of 
Nebka  in  the  Ilird  dynasty.  Yet  this  is  not  a  contemporary  document;  it  was 
engraved  in  the  IVth  dynasty,  and  so  cartouches  in  the  1st  dynasty  may  not 
mean  more  than  the  early  cartouches  in  the  Table  of  Abydos.  It  may  have  been 
thought  proper  in  the  IVth  dynasty  to  put  all  kings'  names  into  a  cartouche. 

Second,  five  predynastic  kings  of  Upper  Egypt  appear  at  the  top,  while  on  the 
Palermo  piece  they  are  of  Lower  Egj^pt.  This  shows  that  a  long  catalogue  of 
kings  before  Mena  was  preserved,  at  least  forty  names. 

Third,  there  are  two  headings  of  kings'  names,  while  the  Palermo  stone  has 
only  one  early  king,  Neteren  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty.  The  first  of  these  headings  has 
a  ^a-name  of  three  vertical  strokes.  This  cannot  agree  with  any  early  ^rt-name, 
except  that  of  Zer.  This  was  sometimes  written,  when  in  small  spaces,  with  as  few 
as  three  strokes,  as  on  the  sealings  106,  107  {R.T.,  II,  xv).  While  naming  this,  it 
may  be  well  to  warn  readers  against  various  wrong  readings  that  have  been  given 
for  this  name ;  the  reading  Zer  is  absolutely  certain  from  such  examples  as  the 
ivory  box,  R.T.,  II,  v,  4,  and  the  tomb  stele  of  the  king  in  Cairo,  which  shows  the 
lashing  of  the  uprights  in  high  relief.     With  this  >^a-name  is  a  cartouche  clearly 

reading   (J  ||  ^    which  is  certainly  the  third  king  of  the  dynasty,  as  on  the  Table  of 

Abydos.  Hence  Aha  must  have  been  the  second  king,  and  Narmer  =  Mena  the 
founder  of  the  dynasty.     Zet  was  the  fourth  king,  and  Den  the  fifth. 

Another  royal  heading  is  unhappily  almost  worn  away.  In  the  ^rt-name 
Sir  Gaston  Maspero  believes  that  he  can  trace  the  remains  of  Semerkhet,  quite 
invisible  in  the  plate.  But  the  plate  shows  traces  in  the  cartouche  which  cannot 
agree  to  anything  but  the  standing  figure  of  Shemsu  =  Semerkhet.  Until  a  closer 
search  of  the  stone  may  show  anything  different,  it  seems  we  should  accept  this 
identification. 


New  Portions  of  the  Annals.  115 

The  names  of  the  mothers  of  the  kings  seem  to  have  been  uniformly  given,  as 
two  are  fully  known  and  portions  remain  in  two  other  instances.  This  agrees  to 
the  matriarchal  nature  of  the  early  monarchy. 

The  Reverse  of  the  slab  bears  the  much  more  detailed  entries  of  annals  of  the 
IVth  and  Vth  dynasty,  like  those  on  the  Palermo  stone. 

Such  are  the  most  obvious  results  from  the  largest  of  the  fresh  fragments. 
The  three  others  are  not  of  much  value  until  pieces  are  found  to  which  they  may 
be  joined.  One  gives  part  of  the  name  of  Khufu,  perhaps  in  the  annal  of  a  later 
king;  another  is  part  of  the  record  of  a  year  of  Neferefra,  fifth  king  of  the 
Vth  dynasty  ;  the  third  gives  part  of  the  annals  of  Sneferu.  The  Reverses  of  all 
these  pieces  are  worn  blank. 

A  fifth  piece  I  purchased  a  few  years  ago,  and  the  circumstances  give  a  little 
light  on  the  origin  of  the  fragments.  Of  that  at  Palermo  nothing  is  known  about 
the  source.  Three,  now  at  Cairo,  were  bought  from  a  dealer,  and  are  said  to 
have  come  from  Minieh.  The  fourth,  at  Cairo,  is  said  to  have  been  collected 
from  a  sebakh  digger  by  one  of  the  Museum  guards  at  Memphis.  Now,  while 
I  was  at  Memphis,  the  sixth  piece  was  offered  to  me  by  a  petty  dealer.  I  at 
once  bought  it,  and  then  handed  it  to  a  confidential  native  to  show  about 
quietly,  and  make  enquiries.  The  story,  as  gradually  obtained,  was  that  it  was 
found  in  Upper  Egypt,  had  been  brought  down  and  sold  to  a  Cairo  dealer:  from 
him  it  had  been  passed  to  a  Memphite  dealer,  and  so  finally  to  myself  This 
shows  how  one  piece  at  Memphis  had  come  from  elsewhere,  and  the  Cairo — 
Memphite  piece  may  have  a  similar  history.  The  question  of  the  source,  or  sources, 
of  the  pieces  is  of  the  utmost  interest  in  view  of  future  search. 

Are  all  the  pieces  from  the  same  monument,  or  were  there  two  or  more  copies 
of  the  Annals  ?  The  internal  evidence  suggests  that  the  Palermo  and  Cairo  pieces 
are  by  different  hands.  On  the  Cairo  piece  the  lines  of  the  top  row  of  kings  are 
irregular  and  tilted  ;  the  main  lines  of  the  registers  beneath  are  less  regularly  cut ; 
the  signs  on  both  fragments  i  and  2  of  Cairo,  suggest  that  when  fresh  they 
were  much  less  beautifully  regular  than  those  of  Palermo.  But  on  so  large 
a  monument,  containing  over  ten  thousand  signs  as  first  set  up,  it  is  very  likely 
that  more  than  one  engraver  would  be  employed,  and  hence  differences  of  cutting 
do  not  prove  there  to  have  been  more  than  one  monument. 

Another  consideration  is  the  thickness  of  the  slabs.  The  large  piece  at  Cairo 
is  2'36  to  2"44  inches  thick  ;  and  this  is  stated  to  be  the  same  as  the  two  small 
pieces  and  that  at  Palermo.  On  the  other  hand  the  piece  said  to  be  from  Memphis 
is  3'i8  inches  thick,  and  the  piece  at  yniversity  College  is  2'09  inches  thick.  These 
differences  are  not  more  than  might  occur  in  different  parts  of  a  row  of  slabs,  which 
were  at  least  ten  feet  long  and  probably  two  feet  high.  If  they  were  loose  tablets, 
then  there  would  be  no  need  for  them  to  be  all  of  the  same  thickness  ;  if  they  were 
built  up  as  a  screen,  the  inequality  of  the  thickness  would  not  be  noticed.  They 
might  be  thicker  to  one  end  of  the  row,  or  thicker  at  the  base.  Before  anything 
can  be  concluded  we  need  an  accurate  gauging  of  all  sides  of  the  larger  pieces,  to 
see  how  much  they  taper  in  any  direction. 

When  we  come  to  try  the  agreement  of  the  Palermo  and  Cairo  slabs,  the 
imperfection  of  the  publications  stands  in  the  way.  There  are  no  dimensions  of  any 
well-defined  points,  only  of  the  rough  broken  edges  ;  the  photographs  have  been  so 
much  trimmed  at  the  edges  that  the  opposite  sides  are  hardly  recognizable  in 
outline ;  the  two  sides  differ  in  scale  in  the  Berlin  plates  of  Palermo,  and  in  the 
Cairo  plates, — four  scales  for  four  views.     What  is  needed  is  good  measurement  to 

H  2 


Il6  New  Portions  of  the  Annals. 

a  tenth  of  a  millimetre  of  the  engraved  main  lines  at  opposite  ends,  to  see  if  they 
are  parallel. 

For  the  present  we  can  only  assume  that  the  lines  on  the  Obverses  of  the  two 
slabs  were  continuous,  and  are  of  the  same  distances  apart.  The  variations  of 
distance  are  not  large  enough  to  prove  the  monuments  to  be  different. 

A  principle  which  has  never  yet  been  used  is  that  of  the  unison  of  the  five 
rows  of  year-spaces.  In  each  of  these  rows  (except  the  lowest  two)  the  spaces  are 
approximately  alike  in  one  row,  but  different  in  size  to  those  of  any  other  row. 
Hence,  unless  the  spaces  of  different  rows  had  exact  proportions  to  each  other, 
there  could  be  no  coincidence  of  the  lines  in  all  the  rows  one  over  the  other,  except 
at  the  ends  of  the  monument.  Each  row  is  like  a  vernier  scale  to  any  other  row, 
rarely  coinciding  in  divisions,  and  with  five  rows  the  chance  of  all  five  coinciding  is 
very  rare.  In  practice,  however,  there  is  so  much  small  variation  in  the  widths  of 
the  spaces,  that  we  cannot  be  certain  how  they  would  agree  further  than  a  foot  or 
two  from  an  ascertained  point.  Within  a  foot  from  any  known  part,  we  can  pretty 
safely  say  whether  the  divisions  fall  into  unison  or  no. 

In  the  same  way  we  can  ascertain  at  what  distance  one  slab  may  have  been 
from  another,  if  not  far  distant,  by  finding  where  all  the  rows  of  spaces  would  fall 
into  the  required  positions,  in  unison  with  another  slab. 

To  examine  this  it  is  needful  to  measure  the  vertical  intervals  of  all  the  rows 
on  the  Cairo  slab,  and  find  what  proportion  it  bears  to  the  Palermo  slab.  It  is  not 
needful  to  know  what  the  absolute  size  is,  but  we  may  adopt  the  plate  of  the 
Palermo  Obverse  as  a  standard  :  really  about  three-quarters  of  the  full  size.  The 
Cairo  photograph  of  Obverse  has  to  be  multiplied  by  r55  to  agree  with  the  Palermo 
photograph.     The  mean  width  of  spaces  in  the  rows  then  are,  in  inches — 

Palermo.  Cairo. 

A     -510  -417 

B     -677  (to  705)        ...         -695  (to -676) 

C      -550  (to -568)        ...         -573  (to -562) 

D     -463  •458(10-463) 

E     -580  (to -620)         ...         ■599(10-598) 

These  differences  between  the  two  slabs  are  not  enough  to  warrant  their  being- 
from  different  monuments  ;  in  most  cases  the  extreme  variation  on  one  slab  (given 
in  ellipses)  touches  the  mean  on  the  other.  The  differences  between  them  make  it 
only  practicable  to  adjust  the  slabs  graphically.  The  Palermo  piece  was  therefore 
drawn,  and  the  divisions  continued  onward  to  the  left  on  the  same  scale ;  the  Cairo 
piece  was  done  similarly,  on  tracing  paper,  but  with  the  continuation  to  the  right,, 
as  it  was  clear  from  the  back  that  the  Obverse  of  Cairo  was  a  short  way  to  the  left 
of  that  of  Palermo.  Then  by  sliding  the  tracing  paper  scales  over  the  others  the 
only  likely  fit  was  found  which  would  bring  all  four  scales,  B  to  E,  into  agreement,, 
within  their  variations.  From  this  results  the  arrangement  of  the  slabs  shown  in 
the  two  diagrams.  As  it  is  very  probable  that  Userkaf  and  Sahura  both  began  at 
the  edge,  we  are  warranted  in  accepting  the  unison  of  the  four  scales  at  the  left  of 
the  Obverse,  as  the  end  of  the  monument.  Thus  we  know  to  a  single  year  how  the 
two  large  slabs  stand,  and  we  have  what  amounts  to  55  years  on  the  scale  D  in 
fixed  order ;  and  by  the  remaining  entries  we  can  extend  our  knowledge  of  some 
lines  ten  or  twenty  years  farther. 

Were  the  equality  of  the  divisions  more  accurate,  we  might  discover  the 
opposite  end  of  the  monument,  by  the  unison  of  the  scales ;  but  the  irregularities 
prevent  accurate  conclusions  at  such  a  distance. 


New  Portions  of  the  Annals.  WJ 

The  indications  which  we  may  glean  about  the  positions  of  the  other  end  of 
the  monument  are  contradictory.  On  the  Reverse  there  is  at  the  base  the  entry  of 
the  7th  biennial  cattle  census  of  Sahura  (marked  here  jc).  The  second  census,  in 
the  line  above,  apparently  by  the  spacing,  must  have  been  in  the  4th  year ;  hence 
the  7th  census  would  be  the  14th  year  ;  and,  as  nine  months  of  it  are  marked,  the 
reign  was  13  years  9  months,  agreeing  to  13  years  in  Manetho.  Apparently, 
therefore,  there  were  10  years  in  the  whole  length  of  the  monument;  and,  as  the 
years  remaining  average  6'i  inches,  the  whole  would  be  61  inches  long. 

Having  thus  found  Manetho  to  be  right  about  Sahura,  we  might  use  the 
28  years  which  he  gives  to  Userkaf  But  this  would  give  a  length  of  134  inches  ;  or, 
ifwekeepto6i  inches,  and  Userkafs  year  spaces  were  as  short  as  the  shortest 
indicated,  then  18  years  must  be  accepted  instead  of  28.  There  is  but  one  year  of 
Shepseskaf,  but  that  would  imply  a  length  of  141  inches,  if  they  were  uniform,  and 
his  reign  were  22  years.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  we  have  not  sufficient  data  for  any 
certain  conclusion. 

The  case  is  quite  as  insoluble  on  the  Obverse.  If  we  were  to  accept  Manetho's 
lengths  of  reigns,  the  lengths  of  the  monument  would  be  indicated  as  between 
65  and  113  inches.  Of  course  all  these  lengths  are  on  the  scale  of  the  plate 
of  the  Palermo  Obverse,  to  be  lengthened  by  a  third  more  for  the  actual  stone- 
work. The  monument  itself  must  have  been  at  least  7  feet  long,  or  perhaps  as 
much  as  12  feet. 

The  historical  points  which  can  be  identified  in  the  first  two  dynasties  are  much 
increased  by  the  new  material.  The  reign  of  Zer  is  fixed  (see  Obverse  diagram) ; 
and  it  cannot  have  ended  between  the  slabs,  as  there  is  no  other  name  on  the 
Palermo  slab.  Hence  the  division  on  row  B  of  Palermo  is  that  between  the  reigns 
of  Aha  and  Zer.  That  Narmer  came  in  the  same  row  is  proved  by  the  predynastic 
kings  extending  up  close  to  the  end  of  the  first  row,  A.  There  is  no  proof  that  the 
line  of  parentage  of  the  king,  above  his  year  spaces,  was  put  in  the  middle  of  his 
reign ;  it  may  not  have  been  quite  in  the  middle,  but  we  may  presume  it  likely  to 
have  been  centred.     If  so  the  reign  of  Zer  was  46  years. 

In  row  C,  the  reign  of  which  the  end  of  the  mother's  name  is  on  the  Palermo 
slab,  probably  extended  to  the  division  on  the  Cairo  slab ;  but  there  might  have 
been  a  short  reign  in  the  gap.  If  not  so,  then  the  reign  of  Azab=Merpaba  was 
about  56  years  ;  or,  if  we  extend  the  royal  parentage  heading  like  that  of  Zer,  then 
57  years.  That  this  belongs  to  Azab  is  shown  by  the  next  being  of  Semerkhet, 
with  9  years  of  reign.  It  has  been  proposed  by  Prof  Newberry  that  this  long 
reign  of  56  years  was  of  Den  by  the  resemblance  of  events  to  those  on  his  tablets. 
But  this  position  seems  difficult  in  that  view,  for  there  would  be  only  a  few  years  of 
Zer,  the  reign  of  Zet,  and  half  of  Den  to  equal  the  whole  of  Narmer  and  Aha  who 
have  left  such  ample  remains.  By  the  position  alone,  these  two  reigns  that  we 
have  of  row  C,  should  be  Azab  and  Semerkhet.  In  row  D  is  the  name  of  Neteren  ; 
and  this  if  centred  must  have  extended  almost  to  the  Cairo  slab.  As  that  bears 
no  name,  evidently  the  reign  of  Neteren  extended  to  a  line  which  can  be  faintly 
traced  as  a  terminus.  This  gives  46  years  for  the  reign.  That  which  follows  it  is 
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Perabsen. 

In  row  E  the  Palermo  slab  states  the  birth  of  Khosekhemui,  presumably  in  his 
father's  reign.  If  so,  his  father  reigned  16  or  17  years.  As  there  is  no  title  on  the 
Cairo  slab  in  this  row,  the  division  must  be  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Khosekhemui, 
and  he  reigned  27  years,  and  lived  30.  This  agrees  practically  with  the  Turin 
papyf  us  which  gives  28  years'  reign, 

H  3 


ii8 


New  Portions  of  the  Annals. 


The  summary  then  of  the  early  dynasties,  as  shown  by  the  fragments  of  the 
Annals,  stands  as  follows,  (The  kings'  names  are  kept  in  the  forms  most  familiar, 
without  any  prejudice  against  more  elaborate  readings.) 

Between  150  to  2CX)  prehistoric  names,  at  least  40  of  which  were  kings  of 
Upper  or  Lower  Egypt,  stand  at  the  head  of  the  record.     After  which  comes — 


Annals. 

Yrs. 

Lists. 

Yrs. 

Narmer=Mena 

62 

Aha  =  Teta       

57 

Athet  =  Zer 

...       46 

Atthe=Zer       

31 

Zet  =  Ata          

23 

Den  =  Semti 

20 

56 

Azab=Merpaba 

26 

=  Shemsu  ... 

9 

Semerkhet  =  Shemsu   .. 

18 

Qa  =  Sen 

26 

Hetepahaui  =  Bezau    .. 

38 

Raneb^Kakau 

39 

Neteren  = 

...       46 

Neteren  =  Baneteren    ... 

47 

Perabsen  =  Uaznes 

17 

Send  =  Senda 

41 

Ka-ra  =  Kaneter 

17 

Neferkara 

25 

17 

Sekerneferka  ... 

48 

Khosekhemui     ... 

...       27 

Khosekhemui 

28 

Here  the  differences  between  the  lengths  of  reigns  in  Manetho  and  in  the  lists 
is  marked ;  yet  there  is  an  exact  agreement  in  the  average  of  33  years  in  both 
sources.  This  seems  to  show  that  there  is  no  biassed  error  in  Manetho.  There  is  one 
possible  explanation,  that  there  were  two  modes  of  reckoning  a  reign,  from  death 
to  death  of  kings,  or  from  co-regency  to  co-regency.  The  average  would  be  the 
same  in  each  case.  The  Annals  certainly  show  the  death  point,  as  there  is  an 
interval  of  82,  90  or  105  days  between  the  joining  reigns — evidently  an  interregnum 
of  mourning. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  see  what  would  result  if  we  accept  the  Manetho 
numbers  as  those  of  the  virile  reign,  before  the  king's  old  age  required — according 
to  African  custom — that  a  virile  successor  should  be  appointed.  Thus  there 
would  be  two  quite  different  reckonings,  which  would  only  be  linked  by  the 
impossibility  of  the  virile  reign  beginning  later  than  the  death  of  the  predecessor, 
or  ending  later  than  the  death  of  the  king  in  question.  Placing  the  facts  together, 
and  dating  from  the  beginning  of  the  dynasty,  the  results  work  out  as  follows  : — 
Annals, 


Death  to  death  reign, 

Dynastic 

Manetho 

Extreme  Hmits  possible. 

years. 

Virile  reign. 

'♦ 

0 

Narmer 

62 

62 

Aha 

119 

1 19-126,  Zer  46  yrs 

119 

Zer 

150 

to  165-172 

150 

Zet 

^71 

165-172,  Den  56  yrs. 

173 

Den 

193 

to  221-228 

193 

Azab 

219 

1-228  Semerkhet  9  yrs.     ... 

219 

Semerkhet 

237 

to  228-237 

237 

Qa 

263 

OBVERS  E 


C  M 


^  B 


.4 


R  EVE  RS  E       /     ivR   SHETP 


5"^    U5 

3<^ 


U5EKKAF 


4^     SA 
2.« 


IV    NEFEKARKAR 


ORIGINAL   RELATION   OF  T 


SAHU  RA 


ir 


:RSE.       SCALE   ABOUT   5:16. 


New  Portions  of  the  Atinals. 


119 


Thus  it  would  appear  that  Zer  lived  on  through  most  of  the  reign  of  Zet ;  and 
that  Den  outlived  Azab,  and  died  in  the  reign  of  Semerkhet,  so  that  Azab  does  not 
appear  at  all  in  the  Annals.  There  is  only  an  uncertain  connection  of  7  years 
(119  to  126),  which  length  of  time  must  cover  the  whole  co-regencies  of  Aha — Zer, 
and  of  Semerkhet — Qa.  The  latter  co-regency  was  probably  short,  owing  to  the 
short  reign  of  Semerkhet,  so  most  of  the  7  years  probably  belongs  to  the  period  of 
Aha — Zer.  In  the  reigns  of  Neteren  and  Khosekhemui  the  Annals  and  the  MSS. 
agree  to  a  year,  so  that  no  serious  co-regencies  are  likely. 

There  are  also  some  other  possibilities  to  consider.  In  the  9th  year  of  Zer,  or 
year  128-137,  there  is  an  entry  of  the  first  festival  of  Zet,  or  Uazet,  as  this  entry  and 
also  the  king's  name  should  probably  be  read.  And  about  the  33rd  year  of  Den, 
or  year  198-207,  is  a  second  festival  of  Uazet.  What  if  these  were  the  years  of  the 
birth  and  death  of  King  Zet,  he  being  born  at,  and  named  from,  a  festival  of  the 


Part  of  the  Annals  of  the  Second  Dynasty. 
University  College,  London. 

goddess,  and  a  festival  to  the  goddess  being  held  at  his  death  ?  This  would  give 
a  life  hi.story  of  Zet  as  being  co-regent  at  twenty-two,  or  less,  and  dying  at  seventy 
years  of  age.  This  is  consistent,  and  makes  us  look  at  another  entry,  as  yet 
untranslated.  In  the  38th  year  of  Den,  or  year  203-210,  there  is  a  figure  of 
Shemsu.  What  if  this  is  the  year  of  the  birth  of  Semcrkhet=Shemsu  ?  It  would 
make  him  sixteen  years  old,  or  less,  at  his  co-regency,  and  thirty-four,  or  less,  at  his 
death. 

These  results  of  adopting  the  Annals  as  of  vital  reigns,  and  the  MSS.  as  of 
virile  reigns,  seem  reasonable  enough  to  be  kept  in  view.     The  most  satisfactory 

H  4 


120  New  Portions  of  the  Annals. 

result  is  that  thus  the  long  reign  of  56  years  belongs  to  Den,  and  so  keeps  the 
connections  which  Prof.  Newberry  has  shown  between  the  events  on  the  Annals 
and  on  the  tomb  tablets  of  Den. 

Such  seems  to  be  all  that  can  yet  be  extracted  on  the  historical  position. 
The  complete  solution  must  depend  on  some  more  large  pieces  of  the  Annals  being 
found.  The  problem  of  the  number  of  copies  has  to  be  settled,  and  the  amount  of 
resemblance  between  them.  Whether  this  was  a  monument  for  the  palace,  for  the 
Nilometer,  or  for  the  temple  has  to  be  considered.  Until  the  Department  of 
Antiquities  will  renew  the  same  conditions  as  before  for  the  verj'  costly  and 
difficult  clearances  deep  under  water  level,  there  seems  little  hope  of  a  regular 
search  for  the  rest  of  the  most  important  monument  of  all  past  ages. 

The  piece  of  the  Annals  here  published,  which  I  bought  in  Egypt,  is  from  the 
Khosekhemui  register,  and  shows  the  top  of  a  year-sign  of  the  Sneferu  register. 
The  horizontal  lines  are  217  and  lO'O  mm.  apart ;  the  vertical  are  185  and 
20'0  mm.  apart.  The  thickness  is  53  mm.  On  the  back  is  a  small  area  of  the 
Vth  dynasty  Annals,  well  engraved  with  clean-cut,  though  shallow,  lines.  Only  the 
numerals  24  and  31  -)-  «  are  left,  beside  the  d  bird  and  twisted  rope  h.  The 
photograph  is  of  the  actual  size.  The  stone  is  a  hard  jet-black  quartzose  rock, 
like  that  at  Palermo.     It  is  now  at  University  College,  London. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


(       121 


THE  TEMPLE  OF  RAMESES  II  AT  ABYDOS. 

It  is  the  misfortune  of  Egyptology  that  great  monuments  are  seldom  published  in 
their  entirety.  We  have  to  be  content  with  little  bits  here  and  there,  and  can  only 
be  thankful  that  even  that  small  amount  is  made  available  for  study. 

The  temple  of  Rameses  II,  at  Abydos,  has  been  eclipsed  by  the  much  finer 
one  of  Sety  I,  and  the  only  publication  is  the  inadequate  one  by  Mariette 
{^Abydos,  II).  Therefore,  on  the  principle  that  half  a  loaf  is  better  than  no  bread, 
I  publish  here  the  notes  and  photographs  which  Mr.  Hugh  Stannus,  F.R.I. B.A., 
made  at  Abydos  during  the  winter  of  1902-3.  He  had  intended  to  publish 
a  complete  architectural  study  of  the  temple,  but  he  died  before  he  had  even  begun 
to  cast  the  work  into  shape.  He  left  the  notebook,  in  which  he  had  entered  the 
detailed  measurements,  and  sketch  plans,  and  with  these  were  some  photographs  of 
bas-reliefs  and  principal  architectural  features  of  the  temple. 

It  is  impossible  to  make  out  from  the  notes  of  another  person  what  that  person 
himself  could  have  made ;  so  this  work  of  Mr.  Stannus  must  not  be  judged  by  the 
meagre  results  which  I  have  obtained. 

In  the  letterpress  on  each  plate  the  words  in  inverted  commas  are  Mr.  Stannus's 
notes  which  accompany  the  sketch  plans  in  his  notebook.  The  lettering  of  the 
chambers  here  is  continued  as  that  of  Mariette,  in  order  to  avoid  confusion. 
Besides  the  notes  given  on  the  plates,  I  add  here  some  further  details  on  the  various 
halls  and  chambers,  referring  to  the  plan  at  the  end  of  this  paper  : — 

"  In  all  rooms,  etc.,  and  generally,  the  stones  are  in  alternate  courses,  so  that 
no  joint  comes  in  a  corner.  A  result  is  that  corners  are  not  square,  but  slightly 
inclined  and  rounded." 

Osirid  court  A.  "  The  Osirids  are  of  sandstone :  three  courses  (above  plinth) 
remain.  The  joints  are  as  shown  below.  Sizes  and  heights  are  very  irregular." 
[Put  2  sketches  here.]  "  The  facing-row  has  the  second  course  to  be  a  through- 
course,  in  the  other  rows  the  third  course  is  a  through-course."  [4  sketches  here.] 
"The  skreens  between  piers  are  limestone."  "All  the  piers  were  whitened  and 
storiated."  "  Storiation  carried  on  both  pieces  across  the  joints  on  to  faces  of 
piers ;  but  there  are  no  figures  or  other  things  carried  across  the  joints."  "  The 
facing  row  of  Osirids  is  2  feet  10  inches  above  the  others.  They  were  altered,  at 
'  00 '  plinth  cut  away,  to  be  flush  with  skreens." 

Chamber  D.  "  Portal  of  sanctuary.  Pieces  of  red  granite.  The  jambs  were 
sandstone."  S.W.  wall:  "Dado  interrupted  by  alabaster  'doons,'  down  to 
pavement."  Mariette  says  the  ceiling  was  of  red  granite,  inscribed;  parois  en 
alb&tre  sur  une  plinthe  en  beau  gres  statuaire  a  grain  tres-fin. 

Chamber  E.  "  Walls  show  barque  on  each  side."  Mariette  notes  a  bench  in 
this  room,  and  says  the  boat  had  the  head  of  I  sis. 

Chamber  F.  "  Tehuti  leads  king  to  Osiris — on  end  wall."  Mariette  notes 
a  bench. 


122  The  Temple  of  Ratneses  II  at  Abydos. 

Chamber  G.     "  Right  hand,  barque."     At  end,  "  King  as  Osiris.    Two  gods 

pouring  •¥•  and  |  over  king's  head."     Mariette  has  reversed  the  inscriptions  in  his 

plates.  Thus  the  inscriptions  on  Plates  14  and  15  of  his  Abydos,  II,  should  read 
from  left  to  right.  The  head  of  the  kneeling  figure  of  the  king,  and  the  three 
vertical  lines  of  inscription  behind  him,  are  just  visible  on  the  end  wall  in  the 
photograph.  S.W.  end,  "No  shelf  here  :  reliefs  instead."  N.W.  side,  "Barque 
ofR.  II." 

Chamber  H.     S.W.  end,  "  No  shelf  here :  marks  of  fire." 

Chamber  I.     Lintel  of  doorway,  sandstone.     Mariette  notes  a  bench. 

Chambers  J,  K.     Mariette  notes  a  bench  in  each. 

Chamber  L.  "  End  wall,  Isis  presents  king  to  Osiris."  Mariette  notes  only 
a  bench. 

Chamber  M.  "  Shelf  projects  9  inches  beyond  blocking  which  supports  it." 
Mariette  gives  (p.  23)  the  names  of  the  guardians  of  the  doors  of  the  nine  niches  on 
the  N.  side. 

Chamber  N.  S.W.  end,  "  No  sign  of  shelf."  It  was  in  this  chamber  that  the 
list  of  kings  was  found,  see  Mariette,  Plate  18.  Mariette  also  remarks  that  the 
door  on  the  N.W.  into  first  hypostyle,  B,  was  cut  after  the  decoration  was  finished, 
and  was  placed  with  the  utmost  care  so  as  not  to  damage  or  interfere  with  the 
sculpture. 

Chamber  O.  "  Piece  of  sandstone  ceiling."  Mariette  notes  on  the  S.E.  side 
a  large  votive  boat  set  on  a  quadrangular  stand,  the  boat  bearing  the  cartouches  of 
Sety  I  (Mariette,  Abydos,  II,  p.  24). 

Chambers  P,  Q,  R.     "  Jambs  slightly  splayed  about  0"4  inch  on  each  side. 

Chamber  S.  "  Walls,  hard  limestone.  Piers,  sandstone  painted  white. 
Insides,  «'.;?.,  reveals  and  backs  of  the  nine  cupboards,  carved  and  painted  in  Sety 
style.of  relief." 


The  Teuiple  o/  Raiiieses  II  at  Abydos. 


123 


I.  Osirid  couri,  /i.  liiocKcd  doorway  on  S.E.  side,  taken  from  within  the  court 
between  the  second  and  third  Osirid  figures.  On  left  upper  register,  bearers  of 
offerings  with  backs  to  door  ;  middle  register,  bearers  of  offerings  facing  towards 

door,  carrying  various  offerings  for  the     |  .     Lowest  register  shows  beginning 

of  royal  titles  in  large  hieroglyphs ;  the  inscription  appears  to  end  with  the  seated 
figure  on  the  same  level  on  the  right  of  the  door. 


124 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


CD  Q 

n  n 


?5 


n 


2.  Osirid  court,  A.  Third  Osirid  figure  on  S.E.  side.  The  blocked  door  is 
partly  visible  on  left.  Names  and  titles  of  king  are  given  in  vertical  inscriptions 
down  front  of  figure  and  on  pier.  On  wall  at  back  are  figures  carrying  beer, 
according  to  the  inscription  copied  at  the  side. 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


125 


^-.(..-^ 


-^. 


3.  Osirid  court,  A.  N.W.  wall,  see  Mariette's,  Abydos,  II,  ja-c.  This  pro- 
cession of  the  prize  cattle,  has  the  normal  ox  in  front,  and  the  ox  with  deformed,  or 
"  crumpled,"  horn  behind.  This  artificial  twisting  of  the  horn  is  still  done  in  Africa. 
In  the  middle  is  the  oryx  led  by  "  The  herdsman  of  the  oryx  of  tethered  cattle 
of  the  eternal  house  (tomb)  called  Ramessu  fttery  Amen  Khnemt  kher  Abdu" 
Mariette's  copy  has  divided  the  upper  line  of  inscription  wrongly,  as  also  in  other 
cases. 


'■^^^•^^^^i^^^S^am' 


t>  ",  v-«-/»^k 


%%. 


r 


5^' 


1^ 


4.  First  hypostyle  hall,  B.  North-west  wall,  see  Mariette,  Abydos,  II, 
Plate  12,  Nos.  15-19  inclusive.  The  lion-footed  shrine(?)  is  carried  by  priests 
walking  four  abreast.  The  nome  figures  below  are  of  Aa-mater,  Zerti  (IVth),  Ani, 
Uast,  Maad,  of  Upper  Egypt,  alternately  male  with  food  offerings,  and  female  with 
drink  offerings. 


126 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


^ 

> 

3 

tr. 

(C 

'C 

bj3 

<u 

5^ 

0! 

0 

'%. 

E 

bo 

o 

(A 

^ 

15 

0 

15 

1; 
0 

4-* 

& 

^ 

0 

tU) 

4) 

c 

C 

'> 

<u 

rs 

r^ 

<J 

trt 

ri 

rt 

>. 

"" 

c 

1-^ 

• 

<^ 

CI 

en 

h^ 

0 

0 

U 

■z 

C 
0 

in 

E 

1) 

a 

0 

<*- 
o 

^ 

> 

< 

0 

a. 

rt 

_4; 

o 

V) 

•4-* 

4»> 

4-» 

V 

C- 

in 

0 

bO-O 

"w 

"^ 

_C 

s 

^^ 

0 

'C 

rt 

,0 

E/1 

" 

■*-• 

it: 

u 

c^ 

c 

c 

E 

53 

0 

C 

t-H 
0 

15 

E 

0) 

^ 

CC 

K 

s 

-a 

IE 

^ 

J3 

u 

15 

U 

e 

rt 

0 

u 

•J-l 

O 

c 

'S 

in 

*  — 

J5 

C 

o 

0! 

u 

■4-» 

C 
0 

.0 

>, 

0 

v; 

<j 

4:; 

0 

C 

m 

-0 

.bjo 

C 

4-1 

'  'Tt 

'A 

t: 

(U 

1>4 

c 

0 

j: 

iZ 

rt 

S  H 

_ 

0 

K-l 

c 

. 

rt 

j= 

'a,  >  (X, 


Tlu  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


127 


6.  Chamber  J.  Doorway  taken  from  N.W.,  looking  across  second  hypostyle 
hall,  C,  to  Chamber  P.  Bases  of  pillars  are  seen  on  the  right,  the  dividing 
vvaM  of  the  two  halls  on  the  left.  The  ornament  above  the  winged  disk  consists  of 
"  two  cartouches  on  nubs,  three  khekers,  four  repeats  +  two  cartouches." 


128 


The  Temple  of  Ranteses  II  at  Abydos. 


« 

U 

'o 

J= 

V 

^~* 

— T 

12 

rt 

2 

"5 

*3) 

«J 

CJ 

> 

■4-* 

^ 

">* 

3 
O 

^ 

^ 

O 

«5 

O 

o 

X 

>s 

o 

-4-» 

j:: 

J= 

X! 

c 

"t3 

H 

o 

O 

^ 

'A 

u 

iJ 

s 

X 

<u 

c 

u 

O 

VI 

o 

(5 

ctf 

o 

b/3 

u 

c 

U 
5 

15 

o 

'a, 

.2 

C 

_o 

V 

o 

^H 

in 

> 

v>. 

_tn 

O 

T3 

2 

c 
o 

d 

CD 

S 

_o 

fe 

u 

^ 

■ — ' 

c 

8 

71 

"^ 

o 

3 

& 

"O 

J3 

4-* 

u- 

'  1  1 

Vm 

o 

o 

o 

c4 

a, 

o 

4-( 

1j 

biO 

^-i 

V 

_tX) 

r^ 

j3 

S 
o 

J 

J2 

^u 

5 

bfl 

3 

C 

»— ) 

•— > 

O 

(U 

£1 

If 

s 

►— < 

U 

O 

d 

'O 

w^ 

O 

o 

c 

-^ 

-*-• 

rt 

X 

rt 
& 

^ 

-»-» 

V) 

3 

•I-* 

^4 

o 
o 

O 
4= 

rt 

•a 

S 

Q 

•^ 

^     4) 

U 

U 

c/) 

3 

rA 

4-t 

'71 

V 

9,    u 

o 

w 

5^  ^ 

■*-< 

CS 

-Q  13 

The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos, 


129 


130 


The  Temple  of  Raiueses  II  at  Abydos. 


The  Temple  of  Ravteses  II  at  A  bydos. 


13' 


/^^u^Ps^oisSi^Ci 


I    2 


132 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


133 


I  3 


134 


The   Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


i^Sfy  «^V'  "=J«v.v-v-.MW^*^7"T'«*s-r  ■       l: 


^•*eiiW 


>k\ 


^mti     ■    "1 


f 

JJ 

0 

C 

.2 

11 

nJ 

r2 

>. 

X 

CJ 

'Jr. 

w 

CU 

u 

4_l 

•3 

i2 

o 

Oi 

CJ 

A 

O 

tt> 

T3 
C 

O 

'S 

« 

J3 

CJ 

£i 

w. 

3 

o 

a. 

bo 

■p 

o 

tc 

o 

o 

CL, 

■73 

<— 

3 

V 

o 

(/) 

c 

3 

s 

tfl 

C 

0 

_c 

3 

^ 

"E 

■w 

CJ 

O 

•M 

J= 

«J 

tr 

4-» 

r-; 

rt 

■*-» 

J= 

j:: 

V3 

o 

1) 

c 

'  ~ 

T) 

3 

.  •. 

^ 

4-* 

1) 

■^ 

3 

E 

> 

4-1 

X 

rt 
•^ 

X 
OJ 

V 

!£ 

c 

Ij 

W 

o 

JZ 

o 

4_> 

4-J 

0! 

o 

9 

X 

^ 

w 

e 

X 

T^ 

CJ 

« 

J= 

c 

^ 

■^ 

V 

Ic 

•y; 

o 

m 

(U 

J2 

4-1 

ISZ 

; 

> 

V- 

^  ^ 

' 

3 

3 

O 

OJ 

C 

< 

6 

4-» 

-a 
c 

o 

tn 

o 

4J 

rs 

4-> 

'{7; 

JS 

4-» 
4-t 

u 

^' 

s 

"rt 

(^ 

:zi 

o 

o 

u, 

•r; 

•^^ 

"c5 

V 

.2 

<u 

w. 

J= 

O 

rs 

O 

u 

^ 

■i-» 
3 

4-t 

OJ 
u 

IS 

O 

o 

5 

3 

ro 

c 

1) 

bX! 

'"' 

'"" 

J3 

c 

13 

o 

^ 

C 

c 

3 

vi 

^ 

a 

The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


135 


14.  Outside  wall,  S.VV.  end  of  N.W.  side.  Battle  of  Kedesh.  Note  the 
Amorites  with  square  shields  and  the  Hittites  with  shields  contracted  in  the  middle, 
like  a  Mykenaean  or  Boeotian  buckler. 


15.  Outside   wall,    S.W.    end   of  N.W.   side.     Hittite  and  Amorite  chariots 
fleeing  up  hill,  probably  to  a  fortress. 


14 


136 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 


A 


SC)\LE    I  -.ZSO 


Willi  RED   CKANITE 

^  GREY  GRANITE 

^Si§5  aUARTZITE 

■■  SAMDSTONEvLlfAESTONE 


Plan. — Drawn  by  Captain  G.  U.  Yule,  R.E.,  from  Mr.  Stannus's  measurements 
and  sketch  plans. 

A  few  notes  are  needed  in  explanation  of  the  plan. 

The  lettering  is  that  of  Mariette,  continued.  The  temple  lies  square  with  the 
river  line,  the  entrance  being  towards  the  river  as  usual.  On  this  plan  the  point  of 
view  of  each  photograph  is  numbered,  corresponding  with  the  number  of  the  view 
here.  The  range  of  each  view  is  marked  by  two  radii  drawn  from  the  point  of  view. 
The  jambs  of  the  great  gateways  are  all  massive  piers  of  hard  stone,  varj'ing  in 
nature  as  here  shaded.  The  purpose  of  these  was  to  prevent  the  overthrow  of  the 
doors  in  a  siege.  The  recesses  in  the  sides  of  the  entrance  gateway  are  of  the 
breadth  of  each  half  of  the  gate. 

In  the  great  Osirid  court.  A,  the  pillars  are  on  the  ground  level  on  three  sides, 
but  are  raised  on  a  platform  along  the  back.     Two  side  stairways,  and  one  in  the 


The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Ahydos. 


137 


middle,  give  access  to  the  higher  level  of  the  temple.  The  middle  stairs  have  smooth 
slopes  at  the  sides  (like  the  other  stairs),  and  also  in  the  middle,  evidently  to  assist 
in  sliding  up  heavy  shrines  or  furniture  of  the  temple.  The  plan  is  here  divided  in 
two,  for  printing  on  the  page  ;  the  row  of  pillars  is  repeated  on  both  halves  of  the 
plan,  to  fix  the  connection. 

In  the  rooms  opening  off"  the  second  hypostyle  hall,  C,  there  are  stone  benches, 
for  placing  the  temple  furniture  upon.  In  the  two  corner  halls,  M  and  S,  are 
benches  on  all  sides,  and  recesses  which  had  doors,  for  holding  the  smaller  objects. 
These  rooms  only  open  out  of  another  room ;  thus  two  doors  would  have  to  be 
forced  in  order  to  attack  them.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  widening  of  the  entrance 
of  each  chamber  to  hold  the  door,  is  always  wider  on  the  right  hand  ;  this  shows 
that  the  door  opened  on  the  left,  i.e.,  was  to  be  pushed  open  by  the  right  hand. 
In  Chamber  N,  the  doorway  into  the  hall  B,  by  the  direction  of  it,  was  intended  to 


1 38  The  Temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos. 

guard  B  from  N,  that  is  to  say,  the  chamber  N  was  to  be  left  in  use,  while  B  and 
all  the  interior  of  the  temple  was  kept  closed.  From  the  direction  of  the  opening 
of  the  doors  at  the  sides  of  the  great  court.  A,  it  seems  that  they  were  not  intended 
for  exit,  but  to  open  into  storerooms  which  had  to  be  guarded  from  attack  in  the 
court. 

The  whole  of  the  work  is  irregular,  the  pillars  and  spaces  and  sides  of  halls  all 
varying  an  inch  or  two  without  any  regard  for  more  accuracy  than  appeared  to  the 
eye. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


(     139     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Le  Tissage  aiix  Cartons,  et  son  utilisation  decorative  dans  I'Egypte  Ancienne. 
Par  A.  van  Gennep  et  G.  JEQUIER.  130  pp.,  12  plates.  4to.  120  frs.  1916. 
(Neuchatel :  Delachaux  et  Niestl^). 

This  volume  is  perhaps  the  finest  work  ever  issued  on  any  ancient  technique, 
both  in  its  completeness  of  material  and  practical  study,  and  in  the  beauty  of  its 
illustrations.  The  only  misfortune  is  that  such  a  book  must  be  costly.  It  combines 
the  ethnological  work  and  technical  skill  of  M.  van  Gennep,  with  the  full  knowledge 
of  Prof.  Jequier,  which  our  readers  will  remember  by  his  work  on  Egyptian 
civilisation  (ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1914,  p.  ?>6).  The  illustrations  alone  are  a  joy  to 
see :  forty-eight  colour  photographs  of  various  patterns  of  belts,  five  actual 
specimens  of  the  woven  patterns,  and  nearly  two  hundred  black  and  white 
illustrations,  serve  to  exhibit  and  explain  every  part  of  the  subject.  What  the 
subject  is  will  puzzle  most  readers,  until  they  read  about  it,  for  it  is  an  art  which 
has  totally  disappeared  in  modern  civilisation,  and  only  lingers  in  countries  where 
art  is  not  machine  made,  and  where  humble  workers  can  yet  give  scope  to  their 
own  skill  and  designs. 

This  kind  of  weaving  has  been  traced  in  Egypt  from  the  beginning  of  the 
dynasties  down  to  our  own  generation,  but  is  almost  e.xtinct,  having  become  reduced 
in  Cairo  to  coarse  work  of  one  old  man,  without  any  apprentice.  It  was  practised 
in  ancient  Libya,  Aegea,  Syria,  Persia,  Elam,  and  East  Prussia ;  and  it  is  still 
a  living  art  in  Japan,  China,  Birmah,  India,  Himalaya,  Sikkim,  Tibet,  Tashkend, 
Minsk,  Persia,  Baghdad,  Armenia,  Caucasus,  Damascus,  Jerusalem,  Tunis,  Algeria, 
Asia  Minor,  Bulgaria,  Bosnia,  Poland,  and  Iceland.  In  any  country  where  narrow, 
thick  bands,  or  ribbons,  of  complex  patterns  are  found,  there  is  a  presumption  that 
this  peculiar  weaving  is  practised,  and  the  work  should  be  examined  as  to  its 
methods.  The  woven  bands  of  inscriptions,  whether  from  Birmah,  Persia,  Poland, 
or  Iceland,  are  all  made  on  this  system. 

This  mode  of  weaving,  which  has  been  curiously  lost  to  sight  in  western  lands, 
has  been  called  after  the  little  spacers  used  to  keep  the  threads  apart, — tissage  aux 
cartons  from  the  spacers  of  card,  or  Brettchen  iveberei  from  the  spacers  of  wood.  In 
English  the  most  intelligible  term  seems  to  be  from  the  principle  of  the  work, — 
twisted  weaving  ;  though,  to  avoid  confusion,  "  carton-weaving  "  would  be  technically 
preferred.  The  essential  principle  of  it  is  to  have  a  many-coloured  twist  of  thread, 
and  to  turn  upward  whichever  colour  is  required.  To  take  the  simplest  case, 
suppose  an  upright  loom  with  each  of  the  vertical  warp  threads  made  of  two 
strands,  red  and  white  If  the  shuttle  is  passed,  not  over  and  under  the  warp,  but 
between  the  red  and  white  strands  of  each  thread,  splitting  the  twist, — then,  whether 
the  red  or  the  white  appears  on  the  face  of  the  stuff,  depends  on  which  is  next  to 
the  weaver.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  whole  surface,  or  any  part  of  it,  red  or  white. 
The  colour  entirely  depends  on  which  strand  of  the  thread  is  outwards. 

In  order  to  part  the  strands  of  the  thread  so  as  to  pass  the  shuttle  or  needle  of 
the  weft,  a  small  spacer  is  needed  to  keep  an  open  channel.  If  there  were  only  two 
strands  a  bar  would  suffice ;  when  there  are  three,  four,  or  even  six  strands  in  one 


140  Reviews. 

thread,  then  a  plate  pierced  with  holes  for  each  strand  is  required.  As  the  plate  is 
turned  round,  any  one  of  the  strands  can  be  brought  outward  for  the  warp  thread  to 
pass  behind  it.  Thus  there  must  be  as  many  spacers  as  there  are  threads,  each  with 
as  many  holes  as  there  are  different  strands  in  a  thread. 

From  the  actual  specimens  provided  in  the  book,  it  will  be  seen  that  for 
ordinary  stout  material  about  twenty-five  threads  are  used — and  as  many  spacers — 
to  produce  one  inch  width  of  stuff.  The  greatest  number  of  threads  worked  at  once 
is  about  three  hundred,  and  M.  van  Gennap  has  worked  with  a  hundred  to 
a  hundred  and  fifty  at  once.  Thus  bands  of  four  inches  wide  are  readily  made,  and 
as  much  as  eight  or  ten  inches  width  is  possible. 

In  looking  at  a  piece  woven  uniformly  with  a  systematic  shifting  of  the  spaces, 
tracing  along  one  thread  the  number  of  crossing  wefts  before  the  direction  of 
twist  is  reversed,  or  the  same  order  of  colours  recurs,  shows  the  number  of  strands 
in  the  thread,  or  of  holes  in  its  spacer.  In  complex  patterns  such  as  inscriptions, 
the  movement  of  twist  of  the  thread  must  be  irregular.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that 
a  red  inscription  on  a  white  ground  was  wanted,  then  by  having  four  threads  on 
the  spacer,  red  and  white  alternate,  the  white  can  be  kept  always  up  in  the  stuff  by 
a  half  rotation  each  time  until  the  red  is  wanted,  when  a  quarter  turn  will  bring 


riNISHEB  THHEAD 


a  red  thread  up.  The  diagram  of  a  section  of  stuff  shows  a  single  thread  of  four 
strands,  pierced  by  the  weft  threads,  and  with  the  strands  separated  by  the  spacer, 
ready  to  pass  the  weft-needle  or  shuttle.  Perhaps  the  very  common  pointed 
rib-bones,  usually  called  netting  bones,  were  for  this  work,  the  thread  being  wound 
upon  them. 

Having  noticed  the  diffusion  and  the  principles  of  this  kind  of  work,  we  may 
summarize  the  Egyptian  forms  of  it  which  are  described  by  Prof  Jequier.  First, 
the  various  patterns  of  zigzags  and  lozenges  of  the  belts  on  royal  statues  are 
collected,  and  all  shown  to  conform  to  the  style  of  the  patterns  of  twisted  weaving. 
The  V-patterns  down  the  kilts  are  of  the  same  styles.  Pouches  for  carrying 
daggers  are  also  similar. 

The  patterns  of  the  stripes  on  the  early  facades  and  false  doors  are  collected, 
and  prove  to  be  of  the  same  fabric.  Here  a  long  section  (14  pages)  is  devoted  to 
the  panelled  building  work  ;  and  the  wooden  origin  of  it  all  is  repudiated  (p.  36) 
on  the  ground  of  the  simpler  houses  of  the  peasants  being  of  mud  brick. 
Unfortuhately,  the  author  has  not  noticed  that  the  actual  timbers  of  such  wooden 
houses  have  been  found  in  the  first  dynasty  (Tarkhan  I,  Plate  IX,  published  three 
years  before).  The  wooden  house  had  narrow  openings  which  could  be  closed  at 
night ;  during  the  day  they  were  open  for  air,  but  shaded  by  strips  of  this  twist- 
weaving,  lashed  down  at  the  bottom  to  prevent  their  blowing  out  of  place.  There 
would  have  been  no  purpose  in  hanging  weavings  over  a  brick  building  ;  but  as 
the  structure  was  of  vertical  wooden  planks,  with  narrow  openings,  such  strips  of 
coloured  weaving  were  exactly  required  to  shade  the  spaces. 


Reviews.  141 

The  various  types  of  geometrical  pattern  are  classified,  and  lettered  M  to  U, 
with  the  sub-varieties  numbered.  One  of  the  most  successful  restorations  is  that  of 
the  curious  chain  pattern  seen  on  the  painted  fa9ades  ;  this  is  closely  reproduced  in 
the  twisted  weaving  on  Plate  IX,  i,  2,  which  seems  thus  to  solve  the  origin  of  this 
puzzling  decoration.  The  patterns  engraved  on  the  ivory  and  woodwork  of  the 
1st  dynasty,  are  also  exactly  reproduced  by  woven  designs,  and  we  must  accept 
them  as  evidence  for  the  use  of  such  fabrics,  although  the  originals  have  entirely 
disappeared. 

The  variegated  dresses  of  the  Syrians  and  Aegeans  are  of  stripes  of  twisted 
weaving  patterns.  It  seems  probable  that  the  strips  of  about  a  couple  of  inches 
width  were  made  separately,  and  then  stitched  together  to  form  a  wider  stuff  for 
dress. 

There  is,  then,  here  an  excellent  and  full  account  of  a  perishing  art,  which  has 
had  a  large  place  in  ancient  work,  and  which  should  be  recognized  at  sight  by  all 
archaeologists.  We  should  be  grateful  that  it  has  been  so  thoroughly  studied 
and  explained. 

The  Influence  of  Ancient  Egyptian  Civilisation  in  the  East  and  in  America. 
By  G.  Elliot  Smith.  32  pp.,  4  plates,  8vo.  1916.  (Manchester  University 
Press.) 

This  amplification  of  a  lecture  is  not  a  favourable  means  of  judging  of  new 
theories.  In  such  a  form,  declaration  has  to  do  duty  for  demonstration,  and  it  is 
impossible  to  present  a  scientific  argument  for  a  fiftieth  of  the  propositions  that  are 
put  forward  in  such  a  space.  It  is  the  more  needful,  therefore,  to  learn  in  what 
sense  various  forms  of  assertion  are  used,  in  order  to  know  the  weight  that  they 
should  have  in  the  reader's  mind.  We  must  begin  by  thus  separating  the  mode  of 
presentment  from  the  further  question  of  the  results  of  the  facts  stated. 

"  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  the  Phoenicians,  lured  forth  into  the 
unknown  oceans  in  search  of  gold,  who  first  broke  through  the  bounds  of  the 
Ancient  East,  and  whose  ships  embarked  upon  these  earliest  maritime  adventures 
on  the  grand  scale  "  (p.  8).  We  happen  to  know  that  gold  was  abundant,  without 
any  voyage,  in  Asia  Minor  and  in  Persia,  in  the  time  of  the  Phoenician.s,  apparently 
more  than  was  obtained  from  any  other  source.  The  greatest  enterprise  of  Phoenicia, 
founding  Carthage,  was  not  due  to  the  lure  of  gold,  for  it  was  some  centuries  before 
it  was  enriched  by  Spain.  As  to  the  Phoenicians  first  breaking  through  the  bounds 
of  the  East  we  have  no  evidence.  Egypt  continually  traded  down  the  Red  Sea, 
and  that  there  was  traffic  on  to  the  Persian  Gulf  is  most  probable.  Hence,  when 
we  read  that  "  there  can  be  no  doubt  "  about  these  assertions,  it  must  be  regarded 
only  as  a  personal  belief. 

Then  we  read  of  the  Phoenicians  that  "only  one  pearl  field  in  the  whole  world 
(the  West  Australian  site  at  Broome)  escaped  their  exploitation."  This  vast  claim 
not  only  has  no  proofs,  but  seems  physically  incapable  of  proof  Such  statements 
therefore  must  be  accepted  as  showing  the  author's  mental  attitude  in  science,  but 
not  further.  Of  another  recent  theory  of  very  uncertain  character,  and  contrary  to 
most  of  the  facts,  we  read  that  it  is  "abundantly  clear,"  and  that  it  is  "no  longer 
possible  to  doubt."     Here,  again,  we  only  touch  on  the  author's  frame  of  mind. 

It  appears  then  that  we  must  seek  for  the  facts  which  are  to  prove  the 
propositions,  and  frame  our  own  judgment  upon  them.  They  are  hard  to  find, 
because,  though  a  multitude  of  things  are  mentioned,  the  degree  of  their  similarity, 
and  their  dissimilarity  from  other  things,  is  never  expressed.     One  of  the  most 


142  Reviews. 

definite  details  is  the  statement  that  the  mummification  practised  in  the  XX  1st 
dynasty  (but  not  any  earh'er  stage)  was  carried  eastward,  and  is  found  in  Eastern 
Asia  still  practised.  Now  we  must  accept  this  as  Dr.  Elliot  Smith's  conclusion,  for 
we  have  not  any  details  before  us  at  first  hand.  Yet  what  does  it  postulate  ?  That 
a  system  has  changed  every  tew  centuries  in  Egypt,  so  that  it  is  precisely  that  of 
the  XXIst  dynasty  that  is  specified ;  and  yet,  as  soon  as  it  left  Egypt,  it  was 
maintained  in  the  same  stage  for  nearly  3,000  years  although  with  different 
conditions,  climate,  and  population.  This  would  be  about  as  difficult  to  credit  as 
any  theory  ever  proposed  ;  to  believe  in  independent  invention  is  by  far  the  more 
likely  course. 

Failing  to  find  a  single  clear  demonstration  of  connection,  excluding  any  other 
explanation,  let  us  turn  to  one  of  the  most  readily  defined  matters,  the  forms  of 
tools,  of  which  we  have  a  fair  amount  of  accurate  evidence.  The  theory  that  the 
use  of  metal  tools  originated  in  Egypt,  has  been  warmly  taken  up  from  Dr.  Reisner 
by  Dr.  Elliot  Smith.  If  Egypt  was  the  source  of  the  tools,  naturally  the  forms 
should  be  the  same  in  the  borrowing  countries.  Now  the  facts  are  that  all  the  most 
usual  tools  of  early  Egypt  are  unknown  elsewhere,  and  the  most  usual  tools  of 
other  lands  are  unknown  in  Egypt.  There  are  eighteen  varieties  of  tools  peculiar 
to  Egypt,  the  main  ones  being  the  flat  square  axe,  the  round  axe,  the  axe  with 
lugs,  the  round  topped  adze,  the  necked  adze,  the  sharp-edge  stick,  the  dagger 
with  crescent  handle,  and  the  dagger  with  parallel  ribbing.  Not  one  of  these  are 
known  in  the  lands  around  Egypt.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pillowy  axe,  the  socket 
handle,  the  tang  and  flange  handle,  the  pierced  axe  or  hammer,  and  the  girdle  knife, 
all  of  the  commonest  forms  of  other  lands,  are  quite  unknown  till  Roman  times  in 
Egypt.  This  implies  that  each  land  had  its  own  vigorous  and  independent 
civilisation,  which  might  be  added  to,  but  which  was  never  supplanted  ;  and  the 
use  of  metals  grew  up  on  quite  independent  lines  in  Egypt  and  other  lands.  Here 
is  something  concrete,  and  capable  of  exact  and  exclusive  proof. 

When  we  find  claimed  as  evidences  of  connection  between  civilisations,  the  use 
of  stone  seats,  of  conch  shells,  of  pearls,  of  most  of  what  is  common  to  nearly  all 
mankind,  we  seem  to  have  gone  back  to  the  old  antiquarian  speculations  of  the 
eighteenth  century ;  and  common  sense  refuses  to  yield  up  the  scientific  methods 
of  proof  which  later  generations  have  clarified. 

The  Turquoise. — Joseph  E.  Pogue.  4to,  162  pp.,  22  plates.  National 
Academy  of  Sciences,  Washington.     Vol.  XII,  Part  II,  3rd  Memoir.     1915. 

This  is  another  of  the  thorough  studies  of  sources  and  details  by  which 
Americans  are  building  up  a  scientific  literature  of  their  own.  The  writer  had  full 
opportunities,  being  Assistant  Curator  of  Minerals  in  the  U.S.A.  National  Museum, 
and  having  studied  the  collections  of  America,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin. 

A  full  recital  of  the  ancient  references  to  turquoise  is  given,  with  translations 
of  authors,  ancient  and  mediaeval.  The  chemical  and  physical  nature  of  the  stone 
is  com'pletely  stated.  The  occurrences  of  it  in  Sinai  are  described  from  all  sources, 
with  the  general  circumstances  of  its  discovery  and  working,  ancient  and  modern, 
occupying  over  six  pages,  with  ample  references.  There  follow  accounts  of  all  the 
other  sources  in  the  world,  especially  in  America. 

The  use  of  turquoise  is  then  considered  at  length.  The  Egyptian  jewellery 
with  this  stone  is  described ;  a  full  account  is  given  of  how  it  is  worked  up  in 
Persia,  India,  Tibet,  China,  and  America,  especially  detailing  the  extensive  use  of 
it  in  Mexico. 


Reviews.  143 

The  mythology  and  folklore  of  turquoise  is  then  recounted,  principally 
European  and  Mexican.  Lastly,  the  technology,  modern  cutting,  imitations,  and 
amount  mined  in  recent  times  is  described  from  a  business  point.  A  full 
bibliography  of!«ighteen  pages  ends  the  book.  The  plates  illustrate  specimens  of 
turquoise  (coloured),  the  mining  sites,  and  jewellery  from  various  countries.  The 
weird  turquoise  mosaics  or  veneers  on  heads  and  other  forms,  are  mostly  illustrated 
here.  The  wide  extent  of  treatment  of  the  subject,  and  completeness  of  detail  and 
reference,  will  probably  make  this  the  standard  work  for  a  century  to  come. 

Annual  Archaeological  Reports,  1914,  191 5.  By  ROWLAND  B.  Orr.  99  plates, 
118  pp.,  8 vo.     Toronto,  Ontario. 

These  Reports  show  the  wide  general  interest  in  North  American  civilisation 
fostered  at  the  Ontario  Museum  ;  and  though  not  directly  touching  Egypt,  they 
give  details  which  are  of  service  for  comparison.  The  figures  on  the  carved  tobacco 
pipes  are  of  much  the  same  level  of  work  as  the  figures  of  prehistoric  Egypt,  giving 
one  equation  for  realizing  the  culture  of  the  early  Egyptians.  Another  paper  on 
the  Cross  in  American  sculpture  raises  the  old  question  of  independent  invention. 
The  great  example  of  the  Palenque  Cross  looks  strongly  as  if  it  was  influenced  by 
the  forms  of  the  seventh  century  A.D.  which  are  given  on  p.  108  in  the  present 
number.  A  paper  on  games  gives  details  of  the  gaming  pieces  which  are  imitations 
of  plum  stones  marked  with  different  colours  on  the  sides ;  a  group  of  these  is 
thrown  into  a  dish  and  shaken,  and  the  numbers  of  each  colour  counted.  This  is  the 
basis  of  hundreds  of  varieties  of  games,  as  cards  are  the  basis  in  Europe.  Gambling 
on  the  results  is  carried  to  excess,  leaving  the  loser  without  a  stick  or  a  rag  of 
property.  Perhaps  the  prehistoric  Egyptian  was  as  reckless  over  his  games.  An 
article  on  the  native  surgery  enables  us  to  realize  what  the  medicine-man  has  been, 
whose  many  properties  have  been  found  in  Egypt.  The  methods  of  flint  working 
are  discussed  ;  bringing  evidence  that,  for  some  kinds  of  flaking,  heating  and 
dropping  cold  water  on  the  flint  will  remove  flakes.  An  account  of  splitting 
a  great  boulder  by  lighting  a  fire  upon  it  and  then  running  water  over  it,  accords 
closely  with  Mrs.  Broadwood's  account  quoted  in  this  number.  As  no  particular 
direction  of  cleavage  was  required,  no  directing  groove  was  cut  in  the  American 
case,  but  heat  and  chilling  split  the  mass  "  with  a  deep  sullen  boom."  Such  are 
some  of  the  suggestive  matters  dealt  with  in  these  Reports. 


(     144     ) 


THE    PORTRAITS. 

The  Alexandria  Museum  has  recently  obtained  a  fine  bronze  head  of  a  Negro 
which  is  believed  to  have  been  found  at  the  site  of  ancient  Xois.  Dr.  Breccia, 
Director  of  the  Museum,  has  published  the  head  with  two  photographs  in  the 
Bulletin  of  the  Archaeological  Society  of  Alexandria,  191 5.  The  bronze  is  in  fair 
preservation,  the  surface  a  little  corroded  from  the  saltness  of  the  soil.  Its  height 
is  62  inches,  slightly  larger  than  our  illustration  here.  The  features  are  strikingly 
similar  to  those  of  many  of  the  Berberine  boys  employed  to-day  as  servants  in  Cairo, 
and  thus  proves  the  long  persistence  of  this  type  of  physiognomy  in  North-East 
Africa. 

Dr.  Breccia  does  not  think  the  head  ever  formed  part  of  a  statue ;  at  all  events 
the  base  of  the  neck  is  not  finished  off  for  being  placed  in  such  a  position.  It  is 
a  fine  piece  of  realistic  work,  but  whether  dating  from  Greek  or  Roman  times  is 
uncertain.  It  has  been  placed  in  the  Greco- Roman  Gallery.  It  is  not  supposed  to 
be  of  the  old  Egyptian  era. 

J.  Offord. 


The  bust  of  a  Negro  which  has  been  published  in  the  Bulletin  of  the 
Archaeological  Society  of  Alexandria  (No.  15,  PI.  II),  has  been  sent  to  me  for 
remarks.  I  know  nothing  of  its  history,  but  it  seems  obviously  a  piece  of  Italian 
work,  and  probably  Roman,  as  Dr.  Breccia  does  not  regard  it  as  Renaissance  or 
modern.  As  a  Roman  version  of  a  Negro  type  it  is  remarkable  and  interesting, 
showing  the  same  generalised  realisation  of  human  types  so  characteristic  of 
seventeenth-century  art.  So  far  as  it  bears  any  resemblance  to  existing  Negro 
types,  it  recalls  most  to  me  the  Negro  of  Bornu,  a  type  of  which  I  have  seen  a  good 
deal  in  the  north  of  Africa  amongst  the  ex-slave  population,  as  well  as  encountering 
them  much  farther  south  in  Southern  Nigeria.  This  type  has  a  comparatively 
small  and  insignificant  nose,  very  flat,  but  with  rather  thin  and  curved  nostrils, 
marked  prognathism,  and  full,  everted  lips.  But  it  is  also  characterised  by  a  great 
breadth  across  the  cheekbones,  and  this  seems  to  be  lacking  in  the  bust,  which 
rather  gives  one  the  impression  of  having  been  modified  by  the  artist  from  the 
appearance  of  his  model,  to  render  it  more  human  and  less  outlandish.  Much  the 
same  Negro  type,  however,  is  also  occasionally  met  with  in  the  North-eastern  Sudan 
— in  Kordofan,  and  thence  across  to  the  western  confines  of  Abyssinia.  The  wool 
is  rather  long  in  growth  for  the  average  Bornu  Negro,  but  looks  as  though  in  the 
model  it  may  have  been  coated  with  clay,  a  practice  very  common  at  one  time 
amongst  the  Negro  peoples  of  Tropical  Africa, — clay  and  mutton  fat.  As  regards 
growth  of  head-hair,  however,  we  are  apt  to  get  a  misleading  impression  as  to  its 
natural  shortness  in  the  Negro  variety  of  man.  When  allowed  to  grow  unchecked, 
Negro  head-hair  may  extend  from  six  to  twelve  inches  from  its  base — or  even  more 
in  women.  It  is  because  the  Negro,  even  in  his  most  savage  state,  desires  to  keep 
his  head-hair  short,  that  we  imagine  he  is  naturally  a  short-haired  man. 

H.  H.  Johnston. 


BRONZE. 


HEAD    OF    A    NEGRO. 


ALEXANDRIA    MUSEUM. 


J 


BRONZE. 


HEAD    OF    A    NEGRO. 


ALEXANDRIA    MUSEUM. 


i 


s^ 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


SIR   GASTON    MASPERO. 
1846-1916. 

We  deplore  the  loss  of  one  who  has  been,  for  a  generation  past,  the  most  prominent 
figure  in  Egyptolog}'.  By  his  commanding  position,  his  great  stores  of  knowledge, 
his  original  [xjwers  of  insight,  and  his  ability  to  attract  the  public,  he  was  the 
figurehead  of  Egyptology  in  France,  and  the  authority  most  generally  recognized 
in  all  other  countries.  His  vast  labours,  all  skilful  and  polished,  united  and  gave 
animation  to  a  wilderness  of  scattered  facts  ;  it  was  in  the  rendering  of  a  picture  of  the 
past  that  he  excelled,  rather  than  in  great  discoveries  or  new  prospects. 

In  such  a  life,  one  of  the  main  points  of  interest  to  others  must  be  its  develop- 
ment and  general  scheme.  Sir  Gaston's  working  life  is  divided  into  five  periods, 
alternately  of  literary  and  of  administrative  work.  Originally  of  North  Italian  stock, 
he  had  the  round  head  and  short  thick  figure  of  the  Alpine  people.  In  thought  and 
language  he  was  not  distinctively  French  ;  his  writing  is  peculiar  for  its  international 
style,  so  much  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  a  word-for-word  translation.  Here  is 
a  chance  sentence  put  into  English,  with  only  a  single  inversion  : — "  In  the  groups 
of  huts  of  mud,  scattered  in  the  hollows  of  the  ravines,  sheltered  the  soldiers  of 
police,  the  guardians  and  their  families,  the  workmen  who  excavated  the  galleries  of 
the  tombs  and  those  who  decorated  them,  the  lower  clergy  attached  to  the  services 
of  burials  and  of  offices  of  commemoration,  the  dealers  in  offerings."  Beyond  the 
necessary  positions  of  the  adjective  and  the  negative  in  French,  there  is  scarcely 
anything  which  is  distinctive  of  one  language  more  than  another  in  his  style.  This 
extreme  simplicity  and  clarity  was  certainly  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  popularity  of 
his  scholarly  exposition  of  ideas. 

The  first  Egyptian  publication  of  Maspero,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  was  in 
1867, — a  study  of  the  dedicatory  inscription  of  the  temple  of  Abydos  ;  in  the  next 
year  followed  a  translation  of  a  Hymn  to  the  Nile.  Then  came  a  visit  to  South 
America,  for  some  scientific  work  for  a  patron,  whose  ideas  could  not  be  furthered. 
After  this  the  youthful  Maspero  received  the  first  great  step,  in  the  editing  and 
copying  of  Champollion's  Notices.  That  work  was  begun  in  1844,  but  had  lingered 
unfinished  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  De  Rouge  entrusted  the  task  to  the  rising 
.scholar,  and  over  a  thousand  pages  stand  transcribed  in  the  clear,  bold,  unmistakable 
handwriting.  Such  a  work  was  an  education  in  itself,  and,  after  that,  he  had  a  firm 
grasp  of  the  general  character  of  the  monumental  style.  This  work  extended  over 
six  years,  1 869  to  1 875 ;  and  in  that  time — down  to  the  age  of  twenty-nine — there  came 
a  long  series  of  studies,  two  on  the  Gebel  Barkal  steles,  on  the  forms  of  conjugation, 

K 


146  Sir  Gaston  Maspero. 

the  judicial  papyrus  of  the  XXth  dynasty,  on  the  personal  pronouns,  on  the  chapter 
of  the  girdle-tie,  an  academic  dissertation  on  Carchemish,  on  Egyptian  letter-writing, 
and  on  papyri  in  the  Louvre. 

All  this  work  was  the  foundation  for  the  principal  literary  labour  of  his  life. 
The  Histoire  Ancienne  des  Peuples  de  r Orient  appeared  as  a  little  octavo  in  1875  ; 
other  editions  gradually  swelled  its  bulk  in  1878,  1884,  and  1886.  Then  the  quiet 
years  of  study  in  Paris  led  to  an  enormous  expansion  of  the  Histoire  into  the  three 
great  volumes  published  from  1894  to  1899. 

To  turn  back  ;  the  second  stage  was  the  official  appointment  in  Egypt,  to  the 
French  Mission  in  1880,  and  to  succeed  Mariette  as  head  of  the  Department  of 
Antiquities  in  1881.  The  old  Bulaq  Museum  was  a  desperately  crowded  storehouse, 
or  collection  of  storehouses,  with  an  overflow  department  all  over  the  garden,  where 
sun  and  watering  played  havoc  with  antiquities.  Such  was  all  the  domain  of 
Maspero  in  his  first  administration,  1881  to  1886.  He  made  some  classification,  so 
far  as  possible  in  such  close  quarters,  and  produced  a  charming  little  guide  book  in 
1883  to  instruct  the  general  visitor  and  help  the  student.  His  routine  was  to  go  up 
the  Nile  on  a  dahabiyeh  for  a  tour  of  inspection  during  the  cool  months,  visiting 
excavations,  and  settling  what  repairs  were  needed  for  the  conservation  of  the 
monuments.  The  boat  generally  returned  loaded  with  the  minor  antiquities  which 
the  Department  had  acquired  during  the  year.  The  administration  occupied 
practically  all  of  Maspero's  time,  so  that  only  small  papers  were  produced  by  him 
during  those  years.  By  1886  he  determined  on  returning  to  France,  owing  to 
Madame  Maspero's  health  and  other  reasons. 

The  third  division  of  his  life,  from  1886  to  1899,  was  in  Paris,  occupied  with 
literary  work  and  study.  First  came,  in  1887,  a  handbook  of  Egyptian  archaeology. 
No  such  work  existed  then,  and  it  has  not  been  supplanted  since  as  a  handbook, 
though  the  progress  of  exact  knowledge  and  dating  has  left  it  now  far  behind. 
A  study  of  the  historical  results  of  the  great  discovery  of  royal  mummies  at  Deir 
el-Bahri,  followed  in  1889,  which  was  the  first  detailed  account  of  the  treasures  which 
had  been  found  eight  years  before.  A  voluminous  catalogue  of  the  Marseilles 
Museum  represented  also  a  considerable  amount  of  work.  A  charming  little  school 
book  on  ancient  life  in  Egypt  and  Assyria  appeared  in  1890,  as  Lectures  Historiqucs. 
It  makes  an  admirable  first  reader  in  French  for  English  schools,  owing  to  the 
simplicity  of  the  style. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  piece  of  research  in  Maspero's  whole  career  was 
his  editing  and  translating  of  the  Pyramid  Texts.  Discovered  in  1881,  these  all- 
important  texts  of  the  early  religion  differed  so  much  from  the  later  style  that  thej- 
needed  wide  insight  and  imagination  to  grasp  their  meaning,  and  several  years 
passed  before  they  appeared  in  sections  in  the  Reciieil.  These  translations  were 
finally  edited  in  one  volume  in  1894,  when  also  began  to  appear  the  great  final 
edition  of  the  Histoire  Ancienne,  the  completion  of  which  occupied  five  years  more. 
Meanwhile  affairs  in  Egypt  had  undergone  many  changes.  At  the  Museum, 
Grdbaut  and  Loret  had  come  and  gone,  and  the  brilliant  administration  of 
De  Morgan  had  produced  the  Dahshur  jewellery  and  other  surprises.  But 
De  Morgan's  talents  in  field  work  were  wanted  for  the  French  Mission  in  Persia, 
and  there  was  no  French  subject  who  could  worthily  take  up  the  Museum  except 
Maspero. 

His  fourth  stage  was  the  administration  in  Cairo  from  1899  to  1914,  at  the 
ages  of  fifty-three  to  sixty-eight.  Again  his  literary  work  almost  ceased,  as 
administration  occupied  his  attention.     Under  the  management  of  Grebaut,  there 


Sir  Gaston  Maspero.  147 

had  taken  place  the  very  ill-advised  removal  of  the  Museum  to  the  old  palace  of 
Gizeh,  where  it  was  in  great  danger  from  fire,  and  at  an  awkward  distance  from 
Cairo.  Such  a  position  was  impossible  permanently,  and  a  new  Museum  was  to  be 
built  within  half-a-mile  of  where  the  old  Bulaq  Museum  had  stood.  This  was 
opened  in  1902,  and  for  the  last  fourteen  years  has  been  an  unending  cause  of 
expense,  trouble,  and  worry  to  the  administration.  Badly  designed,  and  worse 
executed,  it  may  be  said  to  have  been  a  serious  drain  on  the  efficiency  and  result  of 
Maspero's  second  official  life.  He  had  the  great  task  of  bringing  back  from  Gizeh 
the  collections,  now  largely  increased  with  big  monuments.  Then  followed  the 
difficulties  of  arrangement  in  bad  lighting,  and  perpetual  removal  of  parts  of  the 
collection  to  allow  of  alterations,  not  even  concluded  at  the  present  day. 

The  main  official  work  undertaken  in  the  country  was  the  clearance  of  Karnak, 
the  repair  and  reconstruction  of  the  monuments  of  which  were  entrusted  to 
M.  Legrain,  and  are  still  proceeding.  The  annual  visitation  of  sites  was  largely 
occupied  with  the  injury  to  the  temples  of  Philae  and  Nubia,  owing  to  the  Aswan 
Dam,  and  Maspero  published  a  volume  in  1909  on  the  subject.  Of  original  work 
during  the  second  tenure  at  Cairo  there  are  frequent  papers  but  not  many  volumes. 
The  catalogue  of  Persian  and  Ptolemaic  sarcophagi  was  begun,  historical  discussions 
were  written  for  the  volumes  describing  the  discoveries  in  the  Kings'  Tombs,  and  a 
general  account  of  Egyptian  Art  appeared  in  a  volume  of /Irj  Una.  Otherwise 
the  volumes  were  collections  of  earlier  papers,  which  all  students  are  glad  to  have, 
in  a  series  of  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  Archeologie,  and  unfortunately  publishers 
reproduced  other  and  slighter  work,  much  of  which  had  passed  out  of  date,  with 
titles  which  claimed  a  fresh  place  for  it.  The  Museum  at  last  acquired  a  proper 
journal  in  the  Annales  du  Service,  which  Maspero  founded  on  his  return  to  Cairo, 
and  edited  till  his  retirement. 

The  last  two  years,  from  sixty-eight  to  seventy,  were  spent  in  the  august  dignity 
of  Perpetual  Secretary  to  the  F"rench  Academy.  One  of  the  last  tasks  was  writing 
the  biography  and  eulogium  of  Perrot,  the  previous  Secretary.  The  horrible  strain 
of  the  great  war — so  far  more  imminent  and  dreadful  to  Paris  than  it  is  to  London — 
and  the  crushing  blow  of  the  death  of  Jean  Maspero  as  an  officer,  told  on  a  con- 
stitution which  already  needed  rest  and  ease. 

The  final  scene  has  been  described  by  Pere  Lagier  thus : — "  On  the  30th  June, 
1916,  at  the  close  of  a  sitting  of  the  Academy  of  Inscriptions  and  Belles-lettres, 
M.  Maspero  began  to  state  the  works  presented.  He  stopped  almost  at  once, 
and  could  only  say  '  Mes  cher  confreres,  je  vous  prie  de  m'excuser  .  .  .  je  ne  mc 
sens  pas  bien  .  .  .,'  and  putting  his  hand  to  his  forehead,  he  sank  down  in  his 
seat,  with  his  head  thrown  back.  They  gathered  around  him.  All  was  useless, 
and  a  few  moments  later,  before  Madame  Maspero  hastened  in  weeping,  the  great 
Egyptologist  passed  away  without  having  recovered  consciousness."  What  end 
could  be  happier,  or  more  befitting  the  dignity  of  a  great  scholar  ! 

When  one  looks  at  the  whole  meaning  of  the  different  sides  of  Maspero's 
character,  the  leading  feature  of  it  seems  to  have  been  a  strong  Orientalism  of 
thought.  The  logical  clearness  which  belonged  to  his  French  blood  and  training 
was  not  allowed  to  rule  the  whole  mind.  A  large  region  of  sympathy,  of  fancy, 
of  meandering  thought,  of  synthetic  imagination,  was  reserved  free  from  bureaucratic 
invasion.  Often  the  point  of  view  of  the  ancient  pagan  was  presented  so  firmly,  so 
continuously,  with  such  conviction,  with  so  much  reality,  that  it  might  be  supposed 
to  be  the  writer's  own  belief.  He  seemed  to  be  able  to  think  himself  into  different 
states ;  and  this  was  the  ground  of  his  insight  into  the  mazes  of  contradictory 

K  2 


148  Str  Gaston  Maspero. 

faiths  and  long-lost  phases  of  religions.  Such  was  the  starting  point  for  rendering 
the  Pyramid  Texts  with  their  echoes  of  primeval  savagery,  their  slaughtering  of  the 
gods  and  cutting  up  the  dead.  Besides  this  freedom  from  the  domination  of  logic, 
there  was  a  strong  Orientalism  in  the  manner  of  writing.  The  style  is  rather  more 
like  Herodotos  than  systematized  as  a  modern ;  in  some  cases,  perhaps,  more 
oriental  than  Herodotos.  The  reader  has  only  to  take  his  guide's  hand  and  be 
led  on  patiently  to  one  picture  and  another,  to  accept  all  that  comes  and  enjoy  it 
without  continually  looking  at  his  watch.  It  is  all  interesting,  all  worth  while, 
even  though  there  is  no  index,  hardly  any  contents,  no  list  of  pictures,  and  one 
never  knows  what  will  come  next.  Another  Orientalism  was  the  character  of  a 
benevolent  autocrat.  So  long  as  anyone  placed  himself  in  Maspero's  hands  he 
was  treated  fairly  and  often  with  generosity ;  but  once  appeal  to  regulations,  and 
the  regulations  had  been  repealed,  or  were  inapplicable,  and  mysterious  difficulties 
arose.  Yet  another  oriental  trait  was  the  habit  of  attending  to  everything,  large 
and  small.  It  is  a  habit  that  soon  grows  on  a  capable  man  working  with  less 
capable  subordinates ;  the  petty  details  of  administration  were  not  firmly  deputed, 
but  were  continually  breaking  in  on  more  important  work.  In  the  midst  of  settling 
business  of  serious  value,  there  would  be  incessant  interruptions  about  trifles,  to  which 
Maspero  turned  aside  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  instantly  twisted  round  and 
went  on  with  previous  affairs.  It  was  astonishing,  almost  Caesarian,  but  it  did  not 
make  the  most  of  the  years  of  life.  When  writing  at  discretion  in  Paris,  Maspero 
usually  stood  to  his  desk  as  a  substitute  for  exercise.  The  one  chair  in  his  study 
was  piled  high  with  books,  and  a  visitor  had  to  stand  as  well,  or  to  settle,  cross- 
legged,  on  the  parquet  floor. 

A  leading  feeling  with  Maspero  was  his  love  of  books,  of  bibliography,  of  wide 
spaces,  noble  margins,  and  good  display.  He  revelled  in  quoting  the  full  title  of 
every  book  each  time  he  referred  to  it.  No  matter  how  many  dozen  references 
there  were  to  a  volume,  it  always  had  its  half  line  of  full  title,  in  the  deep  footnotes 
that  often  took  up  half  the  page.  It  would  have  been  a  sin  against  the  dignity  of 
literature  to  crop  a  name  to  the  poverty  of  a  few  initials.  The  Cairo  Catalogue 
conscientiously  carries  out  this  principle,  and  dozens  of  similar  objects  are  each 
identically  described  over  many  pages.  It  is  magnificent,  but  it  is  not  archaeology, 
and  such  spaciousness  restricts  the  Catalogue  to  the  wealthy  libraries.  This 
essentially  philological,  philobiblical,  conception  of  things  was  not  compatible  with 
an  interest  in  scientific  classification  or  registration,  or  a  care  for  the  physical 
nature  of  material.  It  belonged  essentially  to  the  scholastic  rather  than  the 
physical  type  of  mind.  Maspero  would  always  rather  edit  a  text  than  discover  it ; 
the  one  he  did  brilliantly,  in  the  other  he  took  no  part. 

Those  who  worked  under  him  ever  had  a  warm  feeling  for  the  kindness  and 
thoughtful ness  of  his  control.  Illness  or  difficulties  were  allowed  for  in  a  generous 
spirit,  and  he  seemed  to  be  the  father  of  the  Department.  Those  with  whom  he 
had  to  do  business  as  excavators,  know  how  he  endeavoured  to  secure  the  rights 
of  the  Museum  with  the  least  annoyance  to  others.  His  choice  of  objects  was 
always  in  the  interest  of  knowledge,  facilitating  the  preservation  of  groups,  or 
allowing  material  to  be  studied  and  later  returned  to  the  Museum.  The  worst 
experiences  were  due  to  the  absurd  requirements  put  in  force  by  government 
interferences,  from  time  to  time,  without  any  official  understanding  of  the  subject. 
Egypt  is  a  thicket  of  conflicting  regulations  and  interests,  legal  and  illegal.  To 
reconcile  them  all  is  impossible,  and,  happily,  not  expected.  Maspero,  with  oriental 
intuition,  knew  how  much  it  was  useful  to  see  or  to  understand,  how  much  could 


Sir  Gaston  Maspero.  149 

be  ignored,  when  to  be  legal,  when  to  be  illegal.  He  steered  through  complications 
which  would  have  wrecked  a  less  elastic  management,  and  in  most  cases — though 
not  all — carried  the  good  will  of  others  with  him.  He  was,  perhaps,  the  man  who 
won  because  i^e  made  the  fewest  mistakes.  Under  the  clearer  conditions  of  a 
unified  government,  now  established,  we  may  hope  that  a  Director  will  not  need 
so  much  diplomacy  in  his  department,  and  our  best  wishes  are  that  the  war  may 
spare  Maspero's  successor  to  improve  upon  the  administration  of  so  great  a  head. 


K  3 


(    ISO    ) 

KING   ZitT   OF  THE   XXIIIrd   DYNASTY. 

In  the  first  issue  of  this  Journal,  p.  32,  Prof.  Petrie  propounded  a  new  theory 
to  account  for  the  previously  unexplained  entry,  "  Zet,  31  years,"  which  is  found 
at  the  end  of  the  XXIIIrd  dynasty  in  the  Manethonian  chronology,  as  given  by 
Africanus.  The  solution  suggested  was  that  this  statement  goes  back  to  a  query 
made  by  Manetho,  who  was  puzzled  to  know  who  ought  to  be  described  as  king  at 
this  disturbed  period,  his  note  taking  the  form  of  some  derivative  of  ?»;TeQ), "  I  search 
after,"  for  which  a  natural  contraction  would  be  ^t)T.  If  I  may  be  allowed,  I  should 
like  to  make  an  alternative  suggestion,  at  the  same  time  welcoming  Prof.  Petrie's 
view  as  being  fundamentally  right,  and  affording  for  the  first  time  a  sound  basis 
for  discussion. 

It  is,  perhaps,  not  sufficiently  brought  out  in  the  article  referred  to  that  it  is 
known  independently  that  Jt^t  was  used  to  indicate  a  query,  and  that  such  notes 
were  taken  up  into  the  text  by  careless  scribes.  "  Sometimes  we  find  at  work  a 
more  intelligent  critic  who  annotates  the  MS.  with  signs  meant  to  point  out  cor- 
ruptions, e.£:,  q(uaere),  r(equire),  f(  =  ^nret),  and  gives  variants  in  the  margin  from 
other  MSS."  (Prof.  Clarke,  Recent  Developments  in  Textual  Criticism,  Inaugural 
Lecture,  1914,  p.  12).  "The  casual  jottings  of  readers  and  correctors  are  often 
imported  into  the  text.  Among  such  may  be  noted,  fr.,  i.e.,  f>;Tet  (Aesch.,  Clioeph., 
3Si>  530)"  (F-  W.  Hall,  Compajtion  to  Classical  Texts,  1913,  p.  194). 

Fully  accepting,  then,  the  origin  of  the  alleged  King  Zet  in  the  misunderstood 
contraction,  there  are  three  arguments  which  appear  to  preclude  us  from  believing 
that  the  query  was  written  by  Manetho  himself: — 

(i)  Such  a  note  would  be  made  by  the  author  for  his  own  guidance  and  it  is 
very  unlikely  that  it  would  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  completed  work. 

(2)  There  is  every  probabilitj'  that  the  mistake  was  made  after  Manetho  had 
been  epitomised.  Not  only  would  it  be  much  easier,  then,  for  the  note  to  be  taken 
into  the  text,  but,  when  taken  in,  it  could  hardly  appear  otherwise  than  as  an 
additional  king.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  found  in  the  original  work,  while  a 
mistake  would  be  possible,  it  would  be  difficult  for  it  to  take  that  particular  form. 

(3)  If  the  supposed  mistake  were  made  in  copying  an  epitome,  it  is  quite 
natural  that  it  should  exist  in  Africanus  and  not  in  Eusebius.  There  is,  of  course, 
no  question  of  each  writer  exercising  an  independent  judgment  on  the  text  of 
Manetho,  and  coming  to  a  different  conclusion.  The  way  in  which  the  material 
is  dealt  with  shows  that  both  worked  on  the  same  list  in  slightly  different  re- 
censions. It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  copy  used  by  Africanus  was  descended 
from  the  annotated  copy,  while  that  of  Eusebius  was  not,  than  that  Eusebius  chose 
to  suppress  this  particular  king. 

The  alternative  view  which  1  venture  to  suggest  is  that  the  note  was  made  in 
a  copy  of  the  epitome  to  call  attention  to  a  possible  error  in  the  total  of  the 
dynasty.  The  total  in  Eusebius  is  44  years,  while  the  sum  of  the  reigns  in 
Africanus  (without  reckoning  Zet)  is  58.  Now,  if  the  corrector  of  the  epitome 
found  58  in  one  copy  and  44  in  another,  he  would  write  44  in  the  margin  of  the 
first  copy.  It  is  true  that  the  number  of  years  assigned  to  Zet  in  the  manuscripts, 
as  we  have  them,  is  31  (or,  in  one  copy,  34);  but,  in  view  of  the  many  changes, 
both  accidental  and  deliberate,  that  the  text  has  suffered,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
understand  that  the  disagreement  may  have  been  brought  about  by  corruption 
in  either  Africanus  or  Eusebius,  or  possibly  even  in  both. 

F.  W.  Read. 


! 


(     151     ) 


^        FUNEREAL    FIGURES    IN    EGYPT. 

To  reach  the  beginning  of  the  use  of  funereal  figures  takes  us  far  back  into  pre- 
historic customs.  The  multitude  of  little  blue  statuettes,  which  are  the  most 
abundant  of  all  the  remains  of  Egypt,  are  only  the  last  stage  of  a  long  past. 
We  must  start  with  the  existing  beliefs  of  Africa,  where  the  love  and  veneration 
of  the  family  still  remains  in  full  force.  When  the  father  of  the  house  dies,  his 
widow  and  children  cannot  bear  to  lose  all  token  of  what  he  was  in  life  to  them. 
They  have  no  cheap  photographs,  no  oil  portraits,  so  their  love  takes  the  course  of 
keeping  the  head  as  long  as  possible.  Such  a  head  is  their  most  cherished  family 
treasure.  It  is  required  to  watch  over  the  prosperity  and  increase  of  the  family. 
It  is  set  up  in  the  home,  or  in  the  family  burial  chapel,  and  there  receives  its 
offerings  at  the  proper  season.s.  At  meals,  before  the  living  begin,  they  pray  the 
dead  to  accept  of  the  food  and  drink.  When  any  of  the  family  marry,  the  new- 
comer must  offer  to  the  ancestor.  In  short  the  family  remains  one,  whether  in  life 
or  in  death.  The  spirit  of  this  union  may  well  make  us  ignore  the  way  of  carrying 
it  out,  a  way  which  we  still  imitate  in  keeping  a  lock  of  hair. 

After  all,  modern  man  has  not  quite  lost  touch  with  his  primitive  instincts. 
The  great  convulsion  of  civilisation  at  present,  has  brought  many  things  to  the  surface 
which  no  one  thought  of  before.  -A  short  time  ago  we  read  of  a  soldier  returned  to 
England  from  a  tornado  of  death,  who  always  carried  a  parcel  with  him  ;  day  and 
night,  at  meals  or  travelling,  he  guarded  it  jealously.  That  parcel  contained  the 
head  of  his  dearest  comrade,  from  which  he  could  not  bear  to  be  parted.  Has  not 
this  very  same  feeling  inspired  one  of  the  great  poems  of  our  language,  and  been 
reflected  thence  in  a  great  painting  ?  Is  not  "  Isabella,  or  the  pot  of  basil," 
a  witness  that  the  old  instinct  lingered  in  Italy,  and  could  be  honoured  by  one  of 
the  most  sensitive  of  English  poets,  and  the  most  spiritual  of  English  painters  ? 
Let  us  not  then  despise  the  African,  whose  feelings  are  so  far  nobler  than  his  means, 
when  he  lovingly  honours  his  parent's  head. 

For  the  benefit  of  the  dead  person  it  was,  however,  needed  to  restore  the  head 
to  the  body,  in  order  that  a  future  life  should  be  enjoyed.  This  restoration  of  the 
head  is  prominently  named  in  the  early  funeral  ritual  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  and  the 
Book  of  the  Dead.  "  Seb  has  given  thee  thy  head."  "  Rise  up  Teta  because  thou 
hast  received  thy  head."  "  Nut  comes  to  thee  .  .  .  thou  movest  because  she  has 
given  thee  thy  head."  "  Pepy  Neferkara  thou  hast  received  thy  head."  From  these 
references  it  is  clear  that  in  primitive  times  the  Egyptians  removed  the  head,  and 
afterwards  replaced  it. 

The  evidence  of  the  graves  gives  the  material  proof  of  these  statements  of  the 
literature.  The  head  was  removed  in  many  of  the  prehistoric  burials,  and  later 
replaced  in  the  grave,  laid  upon  the  body,  or  on  a  pile  of  stones.  In  many  cases 
the  head  was  lost,  or  buried  elsewhere,  and  the  body  remained  without  a  head,  but 
placed  in  such  a  position,  with  offerings  .so  placed  on  the  neck,  that  it  is  certain  that 
it  was  laid  in  the  grave  headless.  As  late  as  the  Ilird  dynasty  we  know  that 
the  chief  noble  of  the  capital,  at  Meydum,  was  buried  after  removal  and  restoration 
of  the  head. 

The  next  stage  was  the  provision  of  a  stone  image  of  the  head  in  the  grave,  in 
case  the  actual  head  was  lost  or  injured.     Such  stone  heads  are  found  in  tombs  of 

K  4 


152  Funereal  Figures  in  Egj'pt. 

the  IVth  dynasty  ("see  Ancient  Egvpt,  1914,  125  ;  1916,  48;.  These  heads  were 
not  supposed  to  receive  offerings,  but  were  always  placed  in  the  tomb  shaft  close  to 
the  chamber.  They  were  thus  distinct  from  the  funereal  figure  in  the  tomb  chapel 
in  which  the  spirit  of  the  dead  received  the  benefit  of  the  offerings.  The  head  is  to 
ensure  that  the  future  life  of  the  mummy  should  not  be  destroyed  owing  to  its 
lacking  a  head. 

But  though  the  head  was  thus  to  be  restored  to  the  body  for  its  own  benefit, 
the  virtue  of  it  for  the  descendants  should  not  be  lost.  The  African  now  makes 
a  funeral  image  of  the  bust  of  the  dead  person,  or  a  whole  silting  figure.  Thus  in 
place  of  the  head  which  was  preserved  in  the  family  to  receive  offerings,  a  bust  is 
provided  for  the  same  purpose,  and  the  family  offerings  are  piled  before  it  in  the 
chapel. 

We  see  then  how  the  Egyptian  had  provided  for  the  perpetuity  of  both  parts 
of  the  African  ceremonial.  The  benefit  of  the  head  to  the  body  was  provided  by 
placing  a  model  of  it  in  the  tomb.  The  benefit  of  the  head  to  the  descendants  was 
provided  by  the  funereal  statue  in  the  place  of  offerings.  The  earliest  of  the  private 
statues  is  the  kneeling  figure  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty  at  Cairo.  In  this,  the  deceased 
adores  Thoth,  and  so  perpetually  "  He  gives  an  offering,  the  washer  of  the  high 
priest  of  Tehuti,  beloved  by  Tehuti,  Dat."  But  this  is  hardly  of  the  class  of 
funereal  figures,  but  rather  a  worshipper  in  a  temple.  The  standing  and  seated 
figures  placed  in  the  tombs  of  the  Ilird  dynasty  are  the  true  equivalent  of  the 
African  figure  placed  in  the  chapel  of  offerings.  The)-,  however,  do  not  lead 
onwards  to  the  ushabti  figures ;  they  are  always  in  the  ordinarj-  dress  of  living 
persons,  and  not  swathed  as  the  dead. 

After  the  burial  of  the  stone  heads  in  the  IVth  dynasty  we  lose  sight  of 
provision  for  the  perpetuity  of  the  mummy.  Probably  the  custom,  not  being 
noticeable,  dropped  out  of  use  like  all  such  hidden  formalities.  The  great 
destruction  of  tombs  and  bodies  at  the  break-up  of  the  Old  Kingdom  is  reflected 
in  the  literature,  as  Breasted  has  remarked  ;  and  the  sight  of  broken  tombs  and 
wrecked  mummies  led  to  a  revival  of  the  custom  of  the  stone  head.  But  as  it  was 
not  only  the  head,  but  the  whole  body,  that  was  often  missing,  so  a  stone  image 
of  the  mummy  was  prepared  that  it  might  serve  indestructibly  in  place  of  the 
actual  mummy. 

These  stone  mummy  figures  appear  at  first  as  a  plain  bandaged  mummy, 
without  any  hands  or  detail  except  the  face,  which  gave  it  personality.  The  next 
stage  was  when  hands  were  added,  in  order  that  the  mummy  could  act.  After  that 
the  mummy  figure  acquired  arms,  which  are  shown  crossed  on  the  breast. 

The  earlier  figures  are  quite  plain,  but  soon  it  began  to  be  felt  that  some 
written  definition  should  be  placed  upon  them.  In  the  end  of  the  Xllth  dynasty 
appears  the  declaration  of  an  offering  to  Osiris  that  he  may  grant  the  deceased  to 
come  forth  happily  in  the  ne.xt  world,  and  to  behold  the  rising  sun.  On  another 
figure  the  old  tomb  inscription  is  placed,  praying  Osiris  to  grant  food  and  drink  for 
the  ka  of  the  deceased.  On  another  the  source  of  the  figure  is  stated,  as  being  made 
by  favour  of  the  king.  On  other  figures  only  the  titles  and  name  are  placed. 
Thus  there  was  no  uniformity  or  fixed  idea  concerning  these  mummy  figures ;  they 
were  not  a  part  of  the  older  ritual,  and  their  status  varied  rather  according  to  the 
views  of  the  family. 

In  the  poverty  and  gloom  of  the  Hyksos  Age,  tombs  are  rare  and  the  furniture 
scanty.  But  as  soon  as  the  old  civilisation  stood  on  its  feet  again,  the  mummj- 
figures  are  found,  sadly  degraded,  almost  beyond  human  form,  yet  with  the  old 


Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 


'3J 


formulae.  In  place  of  hard  stone  and  fine  work,  they  are  roughly  split  pieces  of 
wood  with  an  attempt  at  a  face  marked  on  them.  The  simplest  inscription  is  the  bare 
name,  asserting  that  the  figure  is  such  a  person.  These  were  placed  in  pottery  or 
wooden  coffins,  so  as  to  prove  that  they  are  really  the  mummy,  and  capable  of 
acting  as  the  person.  A  common  formula  is  that  they  were  made  by  a  mother  or 
a  brother  for  the  dead,  "  causing  his  name  to  live."  This  phrase  has  generally  been 
supposed  to  refer  to  a  descendant  perpetuating  the  famih- ;  but  here  it  must  mean 
that  the  figure  causes  the  name  to  live,  that  is,  when  the  mumm\'  is  called  on  to  act 
in  the  next  world,  the  figure  will  do  so  instead  and  cause  the  name  to  live  when 
called.  The  old  form.ula  of  an  offering  to  Osiris,  that  the  dead  may  come  forth  to 
live  in  the  next  world,  is  continued  from  the  Xllth  dynast)'.  The  names  of  the 
gods  upon  these  figures  throw  light  on  the  history  of  the  people.  Down  to  the 
Xlllth  dynastj- — -when  inscriptions  almost  end — the  gods  are  usually  named  singlj-, 
or  if  several  together,  the  plural  number  is  used.     Now  in  the  XVI  Ith  dynasty,  the 


USHABTIS  OF   XIItH    DyXASTV, 

Lhj  of  Model  Coffin. 


AM;  XVIIth. 


names  are  largely  compounded  as  Ptah-Seker,  Ptah-Osiris,  and  Ptah-Seker-Osiris. 
This  marks  the  fusion  of  the  separate  tribes  who  worshipped  different  gods,  and  it 
shows  that  the  great  drive  of  the  Hjksos  migration  had  forced  the  tribes  into  union 
much  closer  than  before. 

Not  only  were  inscriptions  continued  from  earlier  custom,  but  new  forms  were 
brought  in  as  a  personal  choice,  apart  from  any  continuity.  One  figure  bears  an 
order  "  O  Tetames !  wander  to  seek  Tetanefer  (a  brother  who  had  died  before),  go 
around  if  sand  is  being  brought  for  thee,"  that  is,  help  to  provide  for  the  other 
brother.  Another  has,  after  the  usual  formula,  an  order  "  Tetames  wander  to  seek 
and  he  (the  other  brother)  will  be  found."  Another  reads  :  "  Pamedu  wander  to 
seek  Tetame.s,  that  he  may  call  by  name  to  the  ka  of  Tetanefer.  If  you  are  told  to 
carry  sand  of  west  to  east  say  '  I  go.' "  Here  a  family  servant  is  ordered  to  look 
out  for  his  master's  ghost,  and  tell  it  to  call  on  the  help  of  the  previous  brother  who 


154  Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 

was  an  established  inhabitant  of  the  next  world.  These  messages  to  the  dead  show 
us  the  belief  in  the  free  action  of  the  dead,  and  their  life  like  that  they  had  on 
earth. 

Here,  then,  mere  scraps  of  rough  wood  were  supposed  to  personate  the  dead, 
to  be  able  to  seek  one  another,  and  give  information,  and  evidently  to  carry  on 
business  as  if  alive.  Strangely  a  first-hand  description  of  this  belief  has  come  down 
to  us  from  Roman  times,  which  agrees  so  exactly  with  the  magic  value  of  the  early 
figures,  that  it  is  clearly  descended  from  that.  Lucian,  in  his  dialogue  on  lying, 
gives  a  story  by  Eucrates  as  follows : — 

"  While  I  resided  in  Egypt,  whither  I  was  sent  very  young  by  my  father,  for 
the  purposes  of  study,  I  conceived  a  desire  to  go  up  the  Nile  to  Koptos  for  the  sake 
of  hearing  Memnon,  who  at  sunrise  utters  such  surprising  tones.  I  did  hear  him  ; 
not  as  the  generality  do,  yielding  a  bare  sound  without  meaning,  but  I  heard  a  real 
oracle  out  of  Memnon's  own  mouth  in  seven  verses.  On  our  return,  there  happened 
to  be  in  the  same  ship  with  me  a  man  of  Memphis,  of  the  sacred  order,  with  a 
shaven  crown,  dressed  entirely  in  linen,  always  absorbed  in  meditation,  speaking 
very  pure  Greek,  a  tall  man,  lean,  with  a  hanging  underlip,  and  somewhat  spindle- 
shanked.  When  I  saw  him,  as  often  as  we  went  on  shore,  among  other  surprising 
feats,  ride  upon  crocodiles,  and  swim  about  among  these  and  other  river  animals, 
and  perceived  what  respect  they  had  for  him  by  wagging  their  tails,  I  concluded 
that  the  man  was  holy,  and  sought  to  ingratiate  myself  with  him  that  he  might 
communicate  to  me  his  secrets.  At  length  he  persuaded  me  to  leave  my  slaves  at 
Memphis,  and  to  follow  him  alone,  telling  me  that  we  should  not  lack  for  servants. 
When  we  came  to  an  inn,  he  would  take  the  wooden  bar  of  the  door,  or  a  broom, 
or  the  pestle  of  a  mortar,  put  clothes  on  it,  and  speaking  over  it  a  magical  formula, 
make  it  walk,  and  be  taken  by  everybody  for  a  man.  This  servant  went  to  draw 
water  for  us,  did  the  cooking,  arranged  the  furniture,  and  showed  itself  in  every 
respect  an  intelligent  and  active  servant.  Then  when  Pancrates  no  longer  needed 
it,  by  a  second  enchantment  it  became  a  broom  if  it  had  been  a  broom,  or  a  pestle 
if  it  had  been  a  pestle.  One  day,  hiding  myself  in  a  dark  corner,  1  heard,  unknown 
to  him,  the  magic  formula.     It  was  a  word  of  three  syllables. 

"  Ne.\t  day,  when  my  Egyptian  was  occupied  in  the  market,  I  took  the  pestle, 
I  dressed  it,  and  pronounced  the  three  magic  sjllables,  and  ordered  it  to  go  and 
fetch  water.  It  brought  mean  amphora  full.  '  Enough,'  I  said,  'do  not  bring  more 
water,  become  again  a  pestle.'  But  it  would  not  obey  me,  it  continued  bringing 
water,  and  filled  the  house.  I  knew  not  what  to  do.  I  feared  Pancrates  would  be 
angry  on  his  return,  as  he  was  when  he  did  come.  1  seized  an  axe,  and  split  the 
pestle  in  two.  Immediately  each  piece  of  wood  took  an  amphora,  and  went  to  fill 
it  with  water,  so  that  in  place  of  one  servant  I  had  two.  At  this  point  Pancrates 
returned,  guessed  at  once  what  had  happened,  and  turned  again  to  wood  my  two 
water  carriers,  as  they  had  been  before  the  enchantment." 

Here,  exactly  as  with  the  ushabtis,  a  shapeless  piece  of  wood  can  by  enchant- 
ment have  all  the  activity  of  the  person  intended  ;  and  even  if  split  in  two,  as 
roughly  as  many  of  these  figures  are  split,  yet  it  is  just  as  effectual.  It  may  even 
be  that  the  magic  word  of  three  .syllables  was  the  title  oi  shauabii,  possibly  meaning 
appointed  for  satisfaction,  or  some  such  sense. 

It  is  on  these  rough  wooden  figures  of  the  XVIIth  dynasty  that  the  word 
shauabti  first  appears,  as  "  This  .shauabti  (is)  Aohmes  Sapaar,"  or  "  O  Shabti  of 
Sen-hetep,  made  by  his  brother  making  his  name  to  live,  Aoh-hetep."     In  only  two 


Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 


15: 


instances  have  we  the  older  royal  offering  formula  overlapping  the  use  of  the  word 
shabti.  An  amplifying  was  thought  needful,  so  a  longer  form  of  repetition  is 
•'  Shuabti  this,  Aohmes,  if  one  summons  thee  to  all  work  in  the  underworld  '  I  am 
doing  '  say  thoj»,  as  a  servant ;  if  summoned  to  fill  water  channels  or  to  carry  sand 
east  for  west  '  I  am  doing  '  say  thou."  The  name  is  variable  in  form,  either  shuabti, 
shabti,  or  ushabti. 

The  next  idea  is  the  numbering  of  the  workers,  as  a  fixed  corvee  of  Osiris. 
"  Shabti  thi.s,  Tetames,  if  is  numbered  Tetames  to  do  all  works  that  are  to  be  done  in 
the  underworld,  to  make  grow  the  fields,  to  fill  the  channels,  to  produce  ....  to 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 

jl^^HHIj 

f||li.^^H 

1  '■    -#I 

' 

^H  J  JB'       l9 

1    ^:^ 

^B         B 

• 

IB  j«%J 

^^^^^^r                                            **  V^^^^^^^^V 

''^^^^^^^^^F       jjgff.'.  -'i^K  ^^^1     ^^^^^^^Hk^^h 

UsilABlI^ 

I         :    -            IIali-  of 

iHi-;  XVIIIth  Uynasiy. 

.Se.n-k.maoii, 

Nehi, 

Manuna, 

Ka-em-heb, 

Reign  of 

Reign  of 

Chif.f  Archer 

Prophet  oi 

Tehotmes  I. 

TEHUTME.S  III. 

OF  Zaru. 

.Amen. 

transport  sand  of  the  east  to  the  west,  'Behold  me'  say  thou."  This  is  the  first 
extension  of  the  formula  to  field  cultivation.  Here  the  ushabti  is  the  very  man, 
identical  with  him  for  all  his  duties.  This  is  e.xtended  by  the  phrase  that  all  the 
work  is  to  be  done  "  as  a  man  at  his  business,"  or  that  which  is  under  him,  or  in  his 
control. 

At  this  point  two  changes  come  in.  The  deceased  has  the  name  of  Osiris 
given  him,  showing  his  identity  with  the  god.  After  this  deification  of  the  man,  it 
is  evident  that  the  identity  of  the  ushabti  with  the  man  has  to  be  dropped  out  of 


156  Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 

sight ;  it  is  the  first  step  in  reducing  the  ushabti  to  be  a  slave  figure.  The  second 
change  was  putting  the  word  sefuz  always  before  the  formula.  It  seems  most 
likely  that  this  is  an  instruction  to  the  deceased  to  "  make  clear  "  to  the  ushabti  what 
his  work  is.     For  all  these  changes  see  pp.  160,  161. 

After  this  a  new  order  of  things  begins,  the  ushabti  is  furnished  with  tools  to 
work,  and  a  ribbed  wig  like  a  living  person  ;  the  phrase  not  only  of  numbering  the 
workers,  but  of  reckoning  them  comes  into  use.  Soon  after  is  a  new  order  directing 
the  ushabti  to  smite  all  evils  for  the  man  ;  this  implies  that  the  ushabti  was  not  only 
to  work  in  place  of  the  man,  but  that  it  was  to  be  a  bodyguard  to  the  man,  thus 
entirely  parting  it  from  the  old  idea  of  being  a  substitute  for  the  body  if  destroyed. 

These  many  fresh  additions  show  that  the  formula  was  growing  in  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  was  continually  fluctuating  in  the  phrases  and  their  order. 
Among  the  variations,  on  one  is  the  order  to  work  :  "  Be  strong  with  the  hoe  in  the 
pools  "  ;  another  refers  to  being  summoned  daily  ;  another  declares  the  ushabti  to  be 
one  of  the  field  serfs  ;  another,  that  it  is  "  of  the  court  of  servants."  One  ushabti 
is  told  "  listen  thou  to  him  who  made  thee,  do  not  listen  to  his  enemies."  The 
future  official  bliss  of  the  dead  is  declared,  after  naming  the  labours  of  the  ushabti, 
as  "  The  Osiris  Bakenamen  is  harboured  in  peace  at  Amenti  as  chief  of  a  city." 

Toward  the  close  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  the  ushabti  was  looked  on  more  and 
more  as  a  mere  slave,  apart  from  the  mummy  or  the  man.  Then  there  was  no 
reason  to  be  restricted  to  one,  and  half-a-dozen  or  more  were  made.  The  need  of 
compelling  work  is  always  before  the  Eg>-ptian  mind,  so  taskmasters  appear  armed 
with  a  whip,  and  become  a  regular  class  in  each  group.  In  the  XlXth  dynasty, 
and  down  to  the  XXVth,  the  inscriptions  continuallj-  become  shorter  and  more 
corrupt,  until  they  disappear.  Then  the  figure  dwindles,  and  what  had  been  a  large 
stone  figure  is  reduced  to  a  tiny  dab  of  mud. 

The  revival  of  Egypt,  which  we  commonly  look  on  as  due  to  the  XXVIth 
dynasty,  must  really  be  put  to  the  credit  of  the  Ethiopians  of  the  XXVth  dynasty. 
It  was  then  that  fine  work  reappeared,  that  the  ushabti  system  was  revived.  It  is 
the  figures  of  Queen  Amenardas  and  her  vizier  Horua  that  show  an  entirely  new 
style,  about  a  generation  before  the  XXVIth  dynasty  began.  These  were  cut  in 
brown  serpentine,  and  well  inscribed  at  full  length.  Private  ushabtis  also  appear  in 
a  fresh  style  at  this  time.  The  custom  of  having  overseers  disappeared.  The 
figure  is  always  bearded,  and  a  back  pillar  became  a  constant  feature.  Part  of  this 
revival  was  the  establishment  of  a  standard  inscription,  which  is  given  most 
completely  on  the  beautifully  engraved  serpentine  ushabtis  of  Peduamenapt,  who 
had  the  largest  private  tomb  in  the  country,  at  Thebes.  This  sums  up  every  phrase 
that  had  obtained  currency,  into  a  complete  formula :  "  Make  clear,  Osiris,  chief 
reciter,  Peduamenapt.  He  says,  O  shabti  thou,  if  one  calls,  if  one  numbers,  if  one 
reckons,  the  Osiris,  chief  reciter,  Peduamenapt  to  do  all  works  that  are  to  be  done 
there  in  Kherneter,  then  thou  shalt  smite  evils  there,  as  a  man  at  his  business  ; 
'  Behold  him,'  say  thou  if  one  numbers  at  any  time,  for  action  there,  to  cause  to 
grow  the  fields,  to  cause  to  fill  the  channels,  to  transport  the  sands  of  the  west 
eastward  and  vice  versd, '  Behold  me '  say  thou  if  one  seeks  the  Osiris,  chief  reciter, 
Peduamenapt,  '  I  am  doing  it,  behold  me,'  say  thou."  After  this  there  was  no 
variation  except  by  shortening  and  corrupting  the  text.  For  royal  ushabtis  fairly 
good  work  and  inscription  are  found  for  over  three  centuries  down  to  the  close  of 
the  Kingdom.  For  private  persons  they  deteriorated  until  in  the  XXXth  dynasty 
the  inscription  is  reduced  to  merely  a  name,  or  often  not  that,  and  the  work  is  of  the 
roughest,  down  to  mere  slips  of  pottery  with  scarcely  a  human  shape. 


Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 


157 


There  were  thus  three  periods  of  these  substitutes  for  the  mummy,  (i)  the 
Xllth  dynasty  when  fine  work  and  brief  inscriptions  were  used,  which  degraded  to 
the  roughly  split  bits  of  wood  in  the  XVIIth;  (2)  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  with  its 
great  variety  an<|  long  inscriptions,  which  degraded  to  the  little  lumps  of  mud  in  the 


USHABTIS   UNDER  AMF.NHETEP   II. 
MlN-MES.  IIATUEK-IIAI'.  SADIOMIA. 


U.^iiai;ti,, 
Hent-taui. 


or   .:.;.  ;.XI-. 
Panezem. 


UyxASTv. 

Nesikhbnsu. 


XXVth ;  (3)  the  XXVIth  dynasty  figures  with  pilaster  and  beard,  well  inscribed, 
which  degraded  to  the  barely  human  form  in  pottery.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
any  ushabti  or  any  regular  scarab  was  made  after  the  Greek  conquest. 


158  Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 

We  have  passed  over  the  Aten  episode  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  which  changed 
the  ushabti  for  a  time,  as  it  changed  everything  else  in  the  religious  life  of  Egypt. 
The  title  ushabti  was  dropped,  the  claim  for  work  vanishes,  the  labours  of 
agriculture  in  the  underworld  disappear.  All  that  was  beautiful  was  retained,  in 
this  form : — A  royal  offering  given  to  the  living  Aten  who  makes  bright  the  earth 
with  his  beauties ;  may  he  give  sweet  wind  of  the  north,  a  long  duration  of  life  in 
the  e.Kccllent  Amenti,  cool  water,  wine,  milk,  gifts  of  all  young  flowers,  for  the  ka 
of  the  deceased. 

The  material  nature  of  the  ushabtis  has  been  partly  noted  in  the  account  of 
their  changes,  but  it  may  be  stated  here  consecutivelj-.  The  earliest  figures  in  the 
Xllth  dynasty  are  of  fine  hard  white  limestone,  beautifully  made,  but  without  any 
sign  of  hands.  Rather  later  they  were  of  brown  serpentine,  or  of  wood,  and  hands 
or  arms  are  shown.  At  the  end  of  this  first  age  only  wood  was  used  and  that  very 
coarsely  sawn  or  split,  with  a  rough  attempt  at  features,  sometimes  merely  a  head 
hardly  distinguishable  from  the  feet.     The  inscriptions  are  always  written  with  ink. 

The  revival  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  began  with  large,  boldly  cut,  figures  in 
limestone,  and  wood  continued  to  be  used,  as  the  largest  and  finest  figure — that  of 
Nehi — is  of  wood  very  finely  engraved.  Other  stones  came  into  use,  mainly  black 
limestone,  black  steatite,  and  alabaster,  which  are  often  beautifully  engraved  in  the 
middle  of  the  dynasty.  Under  Amenhetep  III  and  IV  granite  was  used  for  royal 
figures.  Pottery  began  to  be  used  about  the  middle  of  the  dynasty ;  at  first 
engraved  and  coated  with  stucco  and  colour,  then  cheaply  moulded,  inscription  and 
all,  then  merely  painted.  This  lent  a  fatal  facility  to  degradation,  and  in  the 
XlXth  dynasty  the  roughest  pottery  figures  with  a  mere  pretence  of  a  name,  or 
none  at  all,  served  as  ushabtis.  The  wooden  figures  also  became  continually  rougher, 
but  they  were  always  cut,  not  merely  split,  and  had  some  semblance  of  hieroglyphs 
on  them.  The  great  growth  of  coloured  glazes  at  the  close  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty 
led  to  using  them  for  ushabtis.  At  first  most  beautifully  inlaid  with  varied  colours, 
or  glazed  on  engraved  stone,  they  soon  became  uniformly  green  or  blue,  with 
written  inscriptions,  as  those  of  Sety  I.  Here  the  way  was  open  to  the  most 
complete  degradation.  In  the  XX  1st  dynasty — even  for  royal  figures — the  work  is 
of  the  roughest,  and  the  inscriptions  very  carelessly  written,  only  redeemed  by  the 
richness  of  the  blue  glaze.  After  that  smaller  and  smaller  sizes  were  made;  the 
colour  became  a  dull  green  ;  the  inscription  dwindled  to  a  mere  name,  or  was 
entirely  omitted ;  the  glaze  was  replaced  by  green  paint,  the  siliceous  body  b\- 
common  pottery  ;  then  mere  yellow  marl  was  used,  and  lastly  black  mud  ;  the  final 
stage  was  in  the  XXVth  dynasty,  when  the  black  mud  lost  the  faintest  pretence  of 
blue  or  whitewash  on  it,  and  remained  a  black  and  formless  dump,  smaller  than  the 
little  finger.  Some  other  experiments  were  tried  in  the  course  of  this  decay,  such 
as  black  mud  figures,  varnished,  and  with  jellow  inscriptions  (XX  1st  dynasty) ; 
pottery  figures,  with  white  or  yellow  wash,  and  neatly  inscribed ;  rough  wooden 
figures  painted  green  to  imitate  glaze  ;  and  impressed  pottery  figures,  the  overseer 
with  an  ascription  in  relief,  and  the  worker  with  the  same  stamped  in. 

The  third  age  began  in  the  XXVth  dynasty  with  engraved  serpentine  figures 
of  fine  work.  Well  glazed  figures  also  appear  with  vertical  columns  of  inscription. 
Very  soon  a  fixed  type  was  established,  with  beard  and  back  pilaster,  covered  with 
green  glaze  or,  rarelj-,  blue.  This  was  fairly  maintained  for  royal  figures,  but 
ordinary  ones  continually  degraded,  with  coarser  work  and  shorter  inscriptions. 
By  the  XXXth  dynasty  few  were  inscribed,  and  those  only  very  illegibly  with  the 
name.     The  glaze  had  become  blackish  green,  the  modelling  very  coarse.     With 


Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 


159 


these  were  also  very  rough  pottery  figures  with  a  dash  of  colour  on  them.  Such  is 
the  last  stage  of  the  mummy  figure,  which — so  far — has  not  been  found  of 
Ptolemaic  times. 


UsllADTIS    '-:  DVNASIV. 

(JKEEN   Gl.AZK   ANU   KoUGH    I'OTTERY. 


Regarding  the  numbers  buried,  they  were  single  figures  of  the  mummy  till  the 
middle  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  rarely  more  till  the  end  of  the  dynasty. 


i6o 


Funereal  Figures  in  Fgypt. 


4.  'Osiris  Tetamesu 

5.  Make  clear  Nehi 

6.  „        „  „      Userhot 
7-       ..         ,.  Any 
8.       „         „                  ,,      Peduamenapt     „ 

Make  clear  Osiris    N    says     he       O 


I.  Shuabti  this  Aohmes 
Tela  res 
3-  O 


says  he 


n  »» 


Shuabti 


this,    N,         if  one  calls. 


PI^^J^'^-^lMflJ^fll^N^Tfl 


fl 


I.  to  do  all  works 

of  Kherneter 

-> 

-•       »       "       »» 

that  are  to  be  done 

in 

M 

3-      in      .. 

»>       »»          »» 

») 

t» 

4.  to  do    „       „ 

>»       »          »» 

)» 

j^ 

5-       in      >.       ., 

„       ,,          ,, 

there 

»> 

»» 

6.      „       „      „ 

n            M                  M 

„ 

») 

7- 

»»            ')                  )' 

)> 

i*^'      »      ..      » 

»»                  M                            » 

»' 

»» 

to  do  all  works 

that  are  to  be  done 

there 

in 

Kherneter, 

<2>-  <==>    c:.  \\\ 

flk 

k 

vk 

8.  Behold  him 
Behold        him 


say  thou,      if  one  numbers,      at  any  time       to  act      there 
say  thou,      if  one  numbers,      at  any  time       to  act      there 

O       o  ~^      o  <2>-         I 


\\^  k-^  \ 


=  (5 


I.  or  sand 
2.  to  transport  the  sand        of  the 

3*  »»  >» 

4- 

5- 

6. 

7- 

8-  »  » 

to       transport  the  sands    of  the 


^ 


east  for  west 

east  to  the 

west 

west 

east 

east 

west 

» 

» 

west 

east  and  vice  vers  A 

east 

to  the 

west  and  vice  versd 

1  f\^^^ 

<^  '    :> 

5  0  Q                r=o«=t 

Historical  Development 

Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 


i6i 


if  one  numbers 


if  one  numbers, 


I.  if  one  summons  thee 

2.  Tetares 

3.  Qedhetep 

4.  Tetamesu 

5.  Nehi 


6.  if  one  reckons 


if  one  reckons,      if  one  summons    thee 


7.  Any  in     flTl 

8.  Osiris  Peduamenapt 

N 


^ 


"^r^ 


3.  as  a  man  at  his  affairs 
5*        »  "        " 


I 


7.  then  sha 

8.  „        ,. 

t  thou  smite  for  him  evils 

there 

7- 

8. 

J1                     M 

then  shalt 

thou  smite  for  him  evils  there, 

as  a  man 

at  his  affairs. 

H      (2 

i^^z:i=j:^fkkT^ 

^^    /n  =,_ 

I.  to  cause 
2.  to  cause  to  grow  the  fields,               to  cause 

to  be  full 
to  be  full 

the  channels 
the  channels 

3- 

))                J)                            i» 

»J 

jj 

4- 

»>                          »i                                              w 

» 

« 

5- 

)»                       »»                                        w 

» 

>' 

6. 

»                     t»                                    »I 

l> 

» 

7- 

»»                     II                                     » 

»I 

)9 

8. 

>•                     1 J                                     » 

» 

» 

to  cause 

to  grow  the  fields,           to  cause 

to  be  full 

the  channels. 

<=:^^ 

S'^j 

!-^ 

i  J  £i  s 

I.  I  am  doing,  reply  thou  as  a  servant  if  summoned 

2.  Behold  me  say  thou 


jf         >j 


5. 


II         II     II        II 


7.  if  numbered  at  any  time 


Me 


„     in   £\ 


if        numbered      at       any  time    I  am  doing  Me       Behold  me  say  thou 

OF   THE    USHABTI   FORMULA. 


O 


•<2>- 


g,  §^^  r^ 


1 62  Funereal  Figures  in  Egypt. 

When  they  came  to  be  regarded  as  servants,  rather  than  as  copies  of  the  mummy, 
half-a-dozen  or  a  dozen  were  buried,  as  in  the  XlXth  dynasty.  The  royal  ushabtis 
of  the  XXIst  dynasty  were  by  the  hundred.  Private  ushabtis  of  the  XXI Ind 
dynasty  were  about  50,  in  the  XXVth  400.  In  the  XXVIth  numbers  from  11  to 
400  have  been  noted.  Details  of  styles  and  errors  show  that  the  large  numbers 
were  made  in  factories  by  many  workmen  jointly,  and  that  the  inscriptions  were 
read  aloud  to  the  engravers. 

The  subject  of  ushabtis  is  not  only  a  prominent  branch  of  Egyptian  manu- 
factures, it  is  a  long  chapter  in  the  history  of  religious  ideas  and  their  growth,  it 
is  a  great  example  of  the  law  of  resuscitation  and  decay.  Each  period  starts  with 
nobly  good  work,  very  soon  the  finest  style  is  reached,  and  then  almost  imper- 
ceptibly each  generation,  each  year,  seems  to  have  been  content  with  something 
almost  as  good  but  rather  cheaper,  until  the  degradation  was  complete.  That  is  the 
history  of  all  human  work  in  Art,  and  we  can  trace  it  in  every  period  and  every 
land  whereof  we  know  enough.  It  shows  that  excellence  and  invention  are 
individual,  that  it  is  the  single  great  impulse  that  lifts  a  people,  and,  after  that, 
imitation  is  the  only  resource  of  later  generations. 

Although  the  variations  of  the  ushabti  texts  are  so  incessant  that  it  is  difficult 
to  find  two  alike,  as  they  vary  even  in  the  same  group,  yet  a  clearer  view  of  the 
whole  subject  can  be  obtained  by  taking  the  earliest  typical  example  of  each  new 
clause,  and  showing  these  as  a  connected  historical  chain  of  growth.  For  this 
purpose  in  the  preceding  tabular  view  of  these  changes  (reading  across  the  two 
pages)  four  of  the  rude  wooden  figures  of  the  XVI  Ith  or  beginning  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty  are  quoted,  numbered  i  to  4 ;  then  Nehi,  Userhat,  and  Any 
(5-7)  of  about  the  time  of  Tahutmes  III ;  after  which  decay  sets  in  until  the  revival 
of  which  Peduamenapt  gives  the  most  complete  text,  marked  8.  The  fine  figures 
of  Heruza  are  almost  identical  with  this,  except  in  placing  plural  forms  for  singular 
after  the  word  "  affairs " ;  and  this  type  continued  to  be  used  till  the  end,  in 
shortened  and  corrupted  forms. 

W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 


(     i63     ) 


EGYPTOLOGY   IN   FRANCE. 

In  the  volume  of  the  Momimenti  Aiitichi  for  191 5,  p.  117,  etc.,  Signers  Paribeni 
and  Romanelli  give  a  Greek  inscription  from  Aspendos,  a  city  upon  the  banlc  of  the 
river  Eurymedon  in  Pamphylia,  which  is  important  for  the  history  of  the  Lagides. 
It  is  a  decree  of  Aspendos  concerning  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  and  proves  the  fact 
asserted  by  Theocritus  in  his  17th  Idyll,  that  Ptolemy  II  for  a  time  held  possession 
of  Pamphylia.  It  would  appear  that  Egypt  lost  her  hold  of  the  territory  shortly 
after  272  B.C.,  when  Theocritus  composed  his  poem,  because  the  famous  Adulis 
inscription  and  Polybius  both  assign  a  conquest  of  Pamphylia  to  Ptolemy  III 
Euergetes.  Perhaps  Philadelphus  only  occupied  part  of  the  province,  and  its 
conquest  was  completed  by  Euergetes,  for  Aspendos  is  situated  but  a  short  distance 
up  the  course  of  the  Eurymedon,  and  so  may  have  been  in  the  power  of  Ptolemy  II, 
because  he  had  command  of  the  sea,  and  his  hold  upon  the  country  was  still  not 
uncontested  further  inland.  Unfortunately,  the  new-found  inscription  does  not 
afford  material  for  fixing  the  year  when  it  was  engraved,  or  that  referred  to  in  the 
text. 

In  their  record  of  gratitude  to  Ptolemy,  the  authors  mention  a  personage  then 
connected  with  their  town,  named  Leonidas.  A  soldier  of  that  name  is  known  as 
taking  part  in  the  Cilician  war  of  309  B.C.,  but  it  is  not  probable  that  this  is  the 
same  personage.  M.  Bouche  Leclercq  in  his  Histoire  des  Lagides,  I,  p.  194,  refers 
to  a  suggestion  of  Gescke,  that  after  Antigonus'  naval  victory,  about  265  B.C.  at 
Cape  Leucolla,  the  portion  of  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  held  then  by  Egypt  was  lost 
to  her,  and  this,  he  says,  would  explain  why  the  monument  of  Adulis  does  not 
allege  that  Philadelphus  left  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia  to  his  successor  Euergetes. 
There  can,  however,  no  longer  be  any  doubt  as  to  Theocritus  having  been  justified 
in  assigning  possession  of  Pamphylia  to  the  Pharaoh  in  his  poetic  panegyric  of 
Philadelphus.  Now  that  Prof.  Strack,  who  so  carefully  collected  all  inscriptions 
concerning  the  Ptolemies,  is  no  longer  able  to  do  so,  it  is  well  to  note  them  in 
Ancient  Egypt. 

In  the  Bulletin  de  Correspondance  Hellenique,  M.  E.  Cavaignac  has  recently 
printed  an  important  article  entitled  "  Le  Chronologie  Egyptienne  au  II I  me  Siecle 
avant  J.C,"  in  which  he  indicates  the  correct  method  of  arranging  a  concordance 
between  the  native  Egyptian  and  the  Macedonian  calendars.  His  system  is  almost 
entirely  founded  upon  statements  in  Ptolemaic  papyri,  chiefly  those  in  British 
publications  such  as  "  Hibeh  Papyri  "  and  the  "  Revenue  Laws."  But  he  also 
quotes  various  unpublished  papyri,  some  of  them  communicated  by  M.  Jouquet, 
and  therefore  probably  the.se  form  part  of  the  collection  at  Lille  which  is  perhaps 
destroyed.  M.  Cavaignac  also  quotes  some  Tebtunis  texts  not  yet  edited.  He 
provides  a  table  showing  the  correspondence  between  the  two  series  of  months  from 
253  B.C.  to  214  B.C.,  embracing  the  reigns  of  Ptolemies  Philadelphus,  Euergetes, 
and  Philopator.  His  essay  will  be  very  useful  to  all  engaged  in  a.scertaining  the 
dates  of  Ptolemaic  papyri  from  the  wording  of  their  contents. 

L  2 


164  Eg)'ptology  in  France. 

In  Vol.  XII  of  the  Bulletin  de  I'Institut  Franqais  de  Caire,  M.  H.  Gauthier 
gives  a  description  of  a  number  of  ancient  Egyptian  antiquities  in  the  Institute's 
possession.  Among  those  deserving  of  mention  is  a  seated  statue  of  Teta  Khart 
(or  Teta  Sheri),  whom  M.  Gauthier  shows  was  the  mother  of  Ahmosis  I,  founder  of 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  This  statue  bears  nine  lines  of  text,  and  this  inscription 
completes  the  missing  part  of  the  words  upon  a  duplicate  statue  of  this  lady  in 
the  British  Museum,  see  Guide  to  the  Egyptian  Collection,  1909,  No.  187.  Another 
interesting  monument  at  Cairo  is  a  stele  recording  offerings  to  Prince  Merimes, 
as  "  royal  son  of  Kush,  or  governor  of  Ethiopia,  for  his  father  Amenhotep  III."  For 
this  proves  divine  worship  as  being  paid  to  a  personage  who  had  never  been 
a  Pharaoh.  Where  the  tablet  was  found  is  unknown,  and  so  it  is  possible  it  was 
erected  to  the  south  of  Egypt,  wherein  the  royal  son  of  Kush  would  be  equivalent 
as  ruler  to  a  king,  and  so  be  a  becoming  person  to  receive  worship  as  a  god.  One 
Old  Kingdom  text  given  by  M.  Gauthier  upon  p.  126  is  curious  because  of  the 
numerous  animal  hieroglyphs  employed  by  the  scribe.  They  exceed  ten  per  cent, 
of  the  whole.     It  also  preserves  a  very  early  specimen  of  the  pre-Christian  »J< . 

The  second  part  of  Vol.  XI  of  the  Bulletin  de  I'Institut  Frangais 
(T Archeologie  Orientale,  published  under  the  direction  of  M.  Pierre  Lacau,  contains 
a  lengthy  discussion  by  M.  Gustave  J^quier  of  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  signs 

•¥•  and  Q ,  including  a  list  of  many  of  the  words  in  which  the  -j-  is  used  as 

a  hieroglyph,  as  the  application  of  it  for  this  purpose  illustrates  the  question.  The 
two  symbols,  M.  J^quier  points  out,  are  very  similar,  and  in  many  cases  one  seems 
to  take  the  place  of  the  other,  but  with  the  exception  that  deities  never  hold  the  Q 

instead  of  the  •¥•.     His  conclusion  is  that  both  signs  do  not  represent  any  familiar 

object  of  civilised  usage,  but  are  true  symbols  made  in  the  image  of  two  primitive 
talismans,  some  kind  of  knots  formed  by  means  of  the  stems  of  aquatic  plants. 

Both  are  emblematic  of  life,  with  the   difference,  that   the  ■¥■  concerns  the  life 

divine,  and  the  Q  an  eternal  life  for  mankind,  also  perhaps  for  things,  but  has  no 
connection  with  that  of  the  gods. 

M.  Pierre  Montet  describes  the  Egyptian  hunting  nets  chiefly  used  for 
waterfowl,  and  by  figures  shows  how  ingeniously  they  were  designed  and  worked  to 
effect  their  object.  Whilst  wide  open  to  embrace  a  considerable  area  they,  by 
a  sudden  pull,  were  quickly  closed  to  form  a  trap.  A  great  deal  appears  to  have 
depended,  according  to  scenes  in  the  tombs,  upon  the  stealth  and  silence  of  a  boy, 
or  man,  concealed  in  the  reeds,  who  signalled  the  proper  moment  for  closing  up  the 
net.     For  an  example  of  this  see  The  Rock  Cut  Tombs  of  Meir,  Vol.  II,  p.  13. 

A  long  article  by  the  late  M.  Jean  Maspero  edits  a  Byzantine  papyrus  relating 
to  Horapollo,  who  was  the  author  of  a  work  upon  Hieroglyphics  still  partially  extant. 
It  concerns  the  misconduct  of  Horapollo's  wife  who  had  gone  away  with  a  lover, 
and  the  manuscript  incidentally  throws  some  light  upon  Roman  law.  It  a!.so 
proves  that  of  two  authors  who  bore  the  name  of  Horapollo  it  was  the  latter  one 
who  wrote  the  Hieroglyphica. 

M.  Henri  Gauthier  endeavours  to  adjust  the  reigns  and  chronology  of  the 
various  Pharaohs  named  Shishak,  or  Chechaiiq  ;  M.  Daressy  had  treated  of  this 
question  in  the  Recueil,  Vol.  XXXV,  and  concluded  there  were  five  kings  of  this 
name.  M.  Gauthier  reduces  these  to  four,  Chechanq  I  ;  Ch^chanq  II  si-Bastit  ; 
Chdshanq  III  reigning  between  the  former  and  Pamai ;  and  Chechanq  IV,  later 
than  Pamai. 


I 


Egyptology  in  France.  165 

M.  Georges  Daressy  describes  the  Sieges  des  Pretres,  and  gives  an  inscription 
of  ten  vertical  lines  concerning  this  piece  of  furniture  appropriated  to  a  first  prophet 
of  the  statue  of  a  Pharaoh  named  Imhotep.  He  had  to  be  duly  installed  upon  the 
seat  and  henceforth  used  it  to  sit  with  his  brother  clerics  and  wise  men  who  had 
similar  resting  places,  and  converse  with  them,  or  occupy  it  at  all  temple  functions 
unless  he  was  personally  employed  at  the  service. 

By  far  the  most  important  essay  in  Vol.  XII,  Part  I,  of  the  Bulletin  is  that  of 
M.  Daressy  upon  an  Egyptian  Zodiac  which  has  lain  for  a  long  time  in  the  Cairo 
"  Institut."  It  not  only  contains  the  Zodiacal  signs,  but  also  in  a  smaller  circle 
beneath  them  the  forms  of  symbols  of  twelve  deities  whom  the  Egyptians  associated 
with  these  particular  signs.  M.  Daressy  publishes  a  photograph  of  this  Zodiac  and 
also  of  the  planisphere  of  Dendera,  for  his  article  is  not  restricted  to  the  study  of 
the  Egyptian  Zodiacal  signs  only.  As  its  title  of  L'Egypte  Celeste  indicates,  it 
concerns  the  imaginary  Egypt  of  the  heavens,  which  was  a  duplicate  of  the 
terrestrial  one.  The  priests  endeavoured  to  utilise  the  constellations  in  the  solar 
path  as  duplicates  for  all  the  Nomes  of  Egypt.  The  deity  of  each  Nome  had  to  be 
found  in  the  sky,  in  the  order  in  which  they  would  be  passed  through  if  the  Sun-god 
were  descending  the  Nile.  The  Zodiacal  signs  being  insufficient  to  take  the  place 
of  some  forty  Nomes,  the  planets  and  some  constellations  were  pressed  into  the 
service.  M.  Daressy  rather,  in  his  researches,  works  back  from  the  celestial  Egypt 
to  utilising  it  for  improving  our  knowledge  of  the  geography  of  its  earthly 
counterpart  in  the  earliest  times,  in  respect  of  the  special  deities  and  their  famous 
Nome  shrines  (see  further  notice  p.  185).  The  subject  requires  taking  up  now  from 
another  direction,  that  is  the  correspondence  between  the  stellar  symbols  of  gods 
upon  the  many  Babylonian  Boundary  Stones  that  have  been  published  by  Scheil, 
Ranke,  and  others,  and  those  of  the  Egyptians  and  Greeks.  They  are  identical  in 
several  cases  and  this  line  of  research  is  likely  to  prove  very  fruitful. 

In  an  article  entitled  " Greco- Arabica,"  M.  Jean  Maspero  proves  that  a  supposed 
personage  named  Melitus,  according  to  Mr.  Evett's  translation  of  the  life  of 
Andronikos  in  the  History  of  the  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria,  is  an  error  of  the 
Arabic  translator,  or  copyist,  the  original  word  having  been  tnilites  "(troops)." 
M.  Maspero  points  out  that  the  statement  in  the  "  Life,"  that  Andronikos  remained 
safe  in  some  monastery  at  Canopus  when  Chosroes  captured  Alexandria,  confirms 
the  account  of  the  chroniclers  who  told  us  that  the  city  was  taken  from  its  western 
side.  He  indicates  another  error  in  the  English  version  of  this  history  of  the 
Patriarchs,  where  it  tells  of  a  Syrian  monastery  of  Ammonius  near  Antioch.  The 
name  should  read  Aftunias,  the  famous  Monophysite  monastery  called  Beit  Aftonia. 

M.  Henri  Gauthier  describes  what  is  known  as  to  the  career  of  Ziharpo, 
a  functionary  of  Nectanebo  I  whose  name  was  read  by  Brugsch  as  Horpta.  His 
sarcophagus  is  at  Cairo,  and  was  catalogued  by  Maspero  in  his  Sarcopliages  des 
Epoques  Persane  et  Ptolemaique.  It  was  disinterred  by  Mr.  Quibell  in  1911  at 
Sakkara.  Brugsch,  in  his  account  of  this  coffin,  stated  it  was  then  in  Vienna,  but 
M.  Gauthier  proves  this  to  be  an  error,  Brugsch  having  confused  it  with  another, 
that  of  Nes-shu-tefnut,  which  was  transported  to  Austria,  but  Ziharpo's  was  left 
in  its  tomb  until  again  unearthed  by  Mr.  Quibell.  Numerous  funerary  statuettes  of 
Ziharpo  are  in  the  Vienna,  Miramar,  and  Marseilles  Museums,  and  have  in  older 
times  been  published  with  his  name  erroneously  rendered  as  Wauupan,  and 
Harpnoub.     His  mother's  name  was  Tefnut. 

M.  Henri  Gauthier  also  gives  photographs  and  an  account  of  a  number  of 
monuments   preserved    in   the  French  Archaeological   Institute  at  Cairo,  giving 

L   3 


l66  Egyptology  in  France. 

whatever  texts  are  engraved  upon  them  ;  most  of  these  are  duplicates  of  similar 
inscriptions  in  various  museums.  M.  Georges  Daressy  adduces  ample  reasons  for 
assigning  the  sarcophagus  found  by  Mr.  Theodore  Davis  in  the  tomb  of  Queen  Tiyi 
to  that  lady.  Although  the  inscriptions  have  been  altered  to  suit  a  male  Pharaoh, 
evidences  that  they  were  originally  written  for  a  feminine  occupant  are  conclusive, 
and  he  concludes  that  the  changes  in  the  writings  were  to  render  them  appropriate 
for  Amenophis  IV.  He  does  not  however  think  the  male  mummy  found  in  the 
coffin  was  that  of  this  king,  but  that  it  is  most  probably  that  of  Tut-onkh-Amen. 

A  series  of  "  Notes  sur  le  Dieu  Montou  "  happily  induces  M.  Georges  Legrain  to 
give  a  summary  of  several  of  the  hundreds  of  statues  discovered  by  him  at  Kamak. 
The  remarks  also  lead  up  to  a  most  interesting  enumeration  of  the  chief  shrines 
and  districts  whereat  Montou  was  most  revered,  more  especially  of  the  now  almost 
vanished    temple   of  the   deity   at    Koum   Madou  (Medamoud),  a  site  at  which 
Daninos  Pasha  has  recently  carried  out  some  excavations.     All  copies  of  texts  at 
this   temple  made  in  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries  are  collated   and 
compared  with  these,  and  others,  now  known.     The  most  important  fact  elicited  is 
that  of  the  worship  of  a  Montou  bull  at  Madou  similar  to  that  of  Apis,  Mnevis,  and 
others  elsewhere.     M.  Legrain  does  not  mention  whether  this  place  is  listed  in  the 
catalogue   of  Serapeums   in   the    Louvre   Papyrus    No.    3079,   and   in    Brugsch's 
Geographical  Dictionary  (see  Pierret,  Etudes  Egyptologiques,  I,  p.  36,  and  Brugsch, 
Diet.   Geo.,  p.   1063).     In   the  volume   upon    the   Rock   Cut    Tombs  of  Meir,   by 
Mr.  A.  M.  Blackman,  he  shows  that  texts  and  scenes  at  Meir  suggest  the  keeping 
of  a  cow  harim  for  the  sacred  bulls,  and  quotes  texts  indicating  similar  arrange- 
ments for  the  bull    deities  elsewhere.     Most  of  the  inscriptions  on   the  Kamak 
statues  of  hierophants  of  Madou  are  of  the  XXXth  dynasty  or  later.     One  text 
mentions  the  Amentit  of  the  bull  who  is  in  Madou,  so  doubtless  a  catacomb  similar 
to  the  Serapeum  at  Sakkara  is  concealed  there  and  awaits  discovery.     A  further 
portion  of  M.  Legrain's  treatise  concerns  Montou  as  god  of  Tuphium  (Toud),  where 
there  also  was  a  sacred  bull  representative  of  Montou,  and  shows  that  the  full  title 
of  the  temple  was  the  Bulls'  Chateau.     At  Toud  there  is  also  a  decorated  chapel,  the 
shrine  of  the  goddess  Tanent,  who  in  some  cases  is  represented  as  a  triple-headed 
hippopotamus. 

Egyptological  essays  are  still  frequently  appearing  in  the  Comptes  Rendus  of 
I'Academie  des  Inscriptions,  and  two  of  these,  by  M.  Moret,  Director  of  the  Musee 
Guimet,  are  of  importance.  One  of  them  endeavours,  and  successfully  so,  to  restore 
the  missing  part  of  a  IVth  dynasty  inscription  published  by  M.  Henri  Gauthier. 
This  text  did  not  reveal  the  name  of  the  personage  concerned,  but  M.  Moret  shows 
him  to  have  been  a  certain  Daou,  who  was  born  at  Abydos  and  lived  under  Pepi  I, 
Meri-ra,  and  Pepi  II.  This  he  does  by  means  of  fragmentary  texts  referring  to  him, 
and  by  other  inscriptions  using  similar  formulae.  Daou's  career  is  pieced  together, 
and  he  is  shown  at  various  times  to  have  been  Court  Page,  a  District  Administrator, 
Superintendent  of  the  Treasury  and  of  the  town  at  the  royal  Pyramid,  Chancellor 
of  the  North,  Judge  in  the  Gate,  Director  of  the  Archives,  Commander  of  the  Body 
Guards,  and  an  hereditary  prince. 

M.  Moret's  second  essay  is  explanatory  of  an  inscription  published  by 
M.  Daressy  some  years  ago,  from  a  stone  that  has  since  so  decayed  that  the  text 
has  perished.  M.  Moret  renders  it  because  its  terms  are  closely  connected  with 
matters  he  discussed  in  his  Donations  et  Fondations  en  Droit  Egypt ien.  It  is  a  sort 
of  autobiography  of  a  man  named  Beb,  describing  the  wise  use  he  made  of  funds 


Egyptology  in  France.  167 

or  property  given  to  him  by  his  father,  during  that  parent's  lifetime,  probably  at  the 
date  when  Beb  came  of  age,  also  of  goods  and  property  bequeathed  to  him  at  his 
father's  decease.  Although  Beb  was  an  official  holding  some  position  as  governor 
of  a  royal  hous»,  and  a  minor  post  at  court,  he  was  evidently  in  business  on  his  own 
account  as  builder  and  proprietor  of  a  mercantile  dahabeah,  and  holder  (or  owner) 
of  real  estate,  and  a  farmer.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  these  works  of  M.  Moret  will 
be  republished  in  some  collection  of  his  essays,  so  as  to  be  more  accessible  to 
students. 

In  the  Journal  Asiatique   for    1914,   Commandant   R.   Weill   continues   his 
exhaustive  researches  into  the  origin  and  correct  succession  places  of  the  Pharaohs, 
who  reigned  in  Upper  Egypt,  or  sometimes  over  the  united  country,  from  the  time 
of  the  Xllth  dynasty  to  the  Theban  restoration.     Every  record  he  can  discover  of 
these  monarchs,  from  those  supplied  by  great  temple  or  sepulchral  inscriptions  to 
those  upon  scarabs  and  amulets,  is  commented  upon  and  utilised.     To  scholars  who 
can  recollect  the  days  of  Bunsen,  Birch,  and  the  elder  Vicomte  de  Roug6,  when  the 
Turin  Papyrus,  Manetho's  List,  and  the  tablets  of  the  kings  at  Karnak  and  Sakkara 
were  almost  the  only  available  records  of  the  reigns  to  conjure  with,  the  advance 
in  knowledge  we  now  possess  is  indeed  immense.     In  the  article  now  referred  to, 
which  is  Chapter  III  of   M.  Weill's  work,  and  runs  to  forty  pages,  he  treats  of 
what  he  terms  the  historic  group  of  the  Antefs,  the  Sebekemsafs,  and  the  Sebek- 
hoteps  of  Thebes.     He  makes  good  use  of  the  sarcophagi  inscribed  with  royal  and 
princely  names  at  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  and  elsewhere,  also  of  the  coffins  and 
sepulchres  of  royalty  enumerated  in  the  Abbott  Papyrus  concerning  robberies  of 
tombs.     He  shows  from  the  monument  of  Antef  V  at  Koptos  (see  Petrie,  Koptos, 
Plate  VIII)  that,  at  the  era  of  the  Antefs,  not  only  was  Egypt  divided  into  at  least 
two   kingdoms,   but   the  Antefs  were   but   petty    princes   of  Upper   Egypt,   the 
Nome  of  Abydos  being  probably  their  territorial  limit  northward.     Southward  their 
sway  may  have  extended  above  the  Cataracts,  but  Thebes  was  their  only  city  of 
size  and  importance.     These  rulers  of  this  restricted  area  were  by  later  compilers  of 
the  royal  Egyptian  annals  considered  as  being  the  true  lineal  Pharaonic  represent- 
atives, but  they  had  to  accept  the  contemporary  existence  of  another  line  of  kings, 
and  to  treat  these  rivals  as  genuine  kings,  and  as   legitimately  exercising   the 
prerogatives  of  royalty  over  a  large  part  of  Egypt.     It  is  curious  that  the  loss  of 
the  sceptre  over  united   Egypt  by  the  Xllth   dynasty   resulted   in    the   Theban 
Principate  becoming   endowed  as  the  nucleus  for   the  successors  of  the  ancient 
legitimate  Pharaohs.     Thus  in  time  this  family  became  recognised  as  the  progenitors 
of  the  New  Monarchy  when  the  foreign  dynasty  in  Lower  Egypt  departed.     M.  Weill 
devotes  a  special  chapter  to  Queen  Sebekemsaf,  wife  of  Nubkipiri  Antef,  because 
Queen  Ahhotep,  spouse  of  the  Pharaoh  Ahmes,  at  a  much  later  epoch,  claimed 
descent  from  her. 

Figures  upon  Prehistoric  Egyptian  and  Dipylon  early  Hellenic  Pottery. 

The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  of  New  York  City  having  acquired  two 
magnificent  specimens  of  the  so-called  Dipylon  style  of  colossal  Greek  vases,  they 
have  been  published  by  Miss  Gisela  M.  Richter  in  the  American  Journal  of 
Archaeology.  Upon  these,  as  on  previously  known  specimens  of  this  peculiarly 
decorated  ware,  are  numerous  figures  of  so-called  mourners.  Some  of  these  are 
evidently  females,  and  are  apparently  shown  as  nude,  with  both  arms  elevated 
above  the  head.     This  singular  attitude  is  precisely  that  of  the  female  figures  upon 

L  4 


i68 


Egyptology  in  France. 


the  very  early  vases  found  in  Egypt,  specimens  of  which  are  given  in  M.  Capart's 
Primitive  Art  in  Egypt,  p.  I2i,  etc.  Herr  Kroker,  in  the  Jahrbuch  Arch. 
of  1886,  had  suggested  Egyptian  influence  for  these  curious  Dipylon  figures. 
This,  following  Prof.  Paulson,  Miss  Richter  does  not  agree  with.  But  the  vases 
now  at  New  York  display  many  of  the  figures  very  distinctly,  and  since 
Herr  Kroker's  essay  several  more  specimens  of  the  Egyptian  type  have  been 
published,  and  the  similarity  of  the  two  series  of  figures  is  now  very  striking  indeed. 
The  very  early  gems  from  Mykenae  representing  deities,  depict  these  clothed 
in  the  flounced  skirt,  or  Babylonian  kanaukes,  evidently  copied  from  Asiatic 
cylinders.  The  long  rows  of  aquatic  birds  on  prehistoric  Plgyptian  pottery  appear 
again  on  vases  from  Susa  and  from  the  Greek  Islands.  Moreover,  the  Dipylon 
four-wheeled  chariots  also  seem  to  be  imitations  of  those  on  Mesopotamian  cylinders, 
so  that  the  female  figures  with  upraised  arms,  in  the  attitude  of  "  hands  up,"  perhaps 
a  sign  of  sorrow  and  hopelessness,  may  really  be  copied  from  Egyptian  pottery 
brought  by  traders  to  Greece  in  very  early  times. 

Joseph  Offord. 


(     i69    ) 


THE   ORIGIN   OF   POLYCHROME   BORDERS:    A   SUGGESTION. 

The  polychrome  border  was  a  decoration  in  general  use  in  Egyptian  tombs, 
dating  from  the  Xllth  to  the  XXth  dynasty  and  even  later.  Two  forms  of  this 
border  are  very  common  in  the  Theban  necropolis.  The  first  form  is  used  solely 
to  frame  the  scenes  on  a  tomb  wall,  and  the  second  is  reserved  as  a  decoration  in 
the  painted  and  sculptured  representations  of  kiosks,  and  small  wooden  shelters 
or  shrines. 

The  order  of  the  coloured  rectangles  is  always  constant  in  the  first  form 
of  border,  namely,  red,  blue,  yellow,  green,  etc.,  with  a  thin  continuous  line  of  green 
bordering  the  rectangles  on  both  sides.  The  colours  in  the  second  form  of  border 
vary  in  their  arrangement  in  different  tombs,  and  the  continuous  band  at  the 
edges  is  yellow  in.stead  of  green.  The  coloured  squares  are  separated  by  a  white 
band  between  two  black  ones,  or  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  a  black  between  two 
whites,  a  form  which  prevailed  later.  It  has  been  suggested  that  these  borders 
represent  reeds  or  some  similar  material,  bound  together  at  intervals ;  but  no 
satisfactory  explanation  has  yet  been  given  as  to  what  the  apparent  binding  really 
is,  or  how  it  was  used. 

First  F'orm  ok  Borher. 


Second  For.m  of  Border. 

A  glance  at  the  illustration  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  house  on  the  following 
pages  shows  that  the  coloured  border  was  probably  intended  to  represent  a  section 
of  the  flooring  of  a  house.  The  rectangular  patches  of  colour  seem  to  represent 
light  beams  ;  and  the  yellow  border  line  above  and  below  them,  either  wood 
planking  or,  more  likely,  matting  or  slats,  to  form  the  floor  and  ceiling  respectively. 

The  following  method  of  constructing  a  light  floor  is  employed  at  the  present 
day  in  Egypt.  Palm  trunks  (when  easily  procurable),  or  beams  of  wood,  are  used 
to  carry  the  main  weight  of  the  floor,  and  at  right  angles,  above  and  below,  palm 
branches  are  lashed  close  together.  The  latter  are  then  covered  over  with  mats 
and  finally  with  mud  to  form  a  solid  floor  and  ceiling.  Such  a  floor  is  only 
constructed  while  the  house  is  in  process  of  being  built ;  that  is,  it  is  entirely 
finished  before  the  walls  of  the  room  above  are  proceeded  with.  The  ends  of  the 
palm  branches  are,  in  consequence,  held  firmly  between  the  walls  of  the  upper  and 
lower  stories  of  the  house,  and  at  first  project  slightly  from  them.  They  are 
eventually  cut  off  flush  with  the  outside  of  the  wall,  which  is  plastered  over  with 
mud  when  the  house  is  completed. 


170 


The  Origin  of  Polychrome  Borders :  A  Suggestion. 


House  ok  Tehuti-neker  Huia. 
Granaries  ai'  Top. 
Private  Rooms. 
Public  Recei-tion  Room. 
Work  Rooms  at  Base. 


The  Origin  of  Polychrome  Borders :  A  Suggestion. 


171 


lioL'sE  OF  Teiiuh-Nkkkk  Huia — conlinned. 
Carrying  up  ok  Food  to  Uiter  Floors.       I  Carrying  up  Grain  to  Granaries  on 

Preparing  Leaiher,  below.  |  the  Rook. 


172  The  Origin  of  Polychrome  Borders :  A  Suggestion. 

In  the  building  of  the  floor  of  an  ancient  Egyptian  house  the  mode  of  pro- 
cedure was  doubtless  the  same,  but  in  lieu  of  palm  branches  the  papyrus  reed  was 
probably  used.  Owing  to  the  triangular  shape  of  the  reeds  in  section  it  would  be 
perfectly  possible  to  make  the  equivalent  of  light  beams  of  a  square  or  rectangular 
form  by  lashing  them  together  in  a  compact  bunch ;  this  was  certainly  done  for 
columns,  as  imitated  at  Tell  Amarna.  The  ends  of  the  beams,  and  the  covering 
of  reeds  or  matting  above  and  below  them,  would  doubtless  first  project  irregularly 
from  the  walls,  as  they  do  in  uncompleted  Arab  houses,  and  they  would  also  be  cut 
flush  with  the  walls,  as  at  the  present  day. 

The  colouring  of  the  rectangles  in  the  separate  borders  illustrated,  and  in  that 
which  represents  the  flooring  of  the  ancient  house,  is  difficult  to  explain.  The  only 
solution  that  the  writer  can  offer  is  that,  in  lieu  of  plastering  over  the  ends  of  the 
beams  and  matting  which  were  cut  off"  flush  with  the  outside  of  the  walls  of  a 
house,  the  ancient  Egyptians  coloured  them  instead  to  serve  as  a  decoration. 

It  will  be  noticed  in  the  illustration  that  the  flooring  between  the  lower  rooms 
and  the  rooms  above  is  of  a  different  nature  from  that  just  described.  It  is 
coloured  red,  and  what  apparently  represents  matting  above  it  is  yellow.  A  heavy 
floor  (doubtless  constructed  entirely  of  wood)  would  be  necessary  in  this  case  to 
support  the  weighty  columns  above,  which  are  also  coloured  red,  probably  to 
represent  wood.  The  pillars  supporting  the  roof  of  the  house  are  coloured  green ; 
and,  as  the  weight  they  supported  was  comparatively  light,  they  were  probably 
made  entirely  of  papyrus  stalks  lashed  together. 

The  scenes  depicted  in  this  illustration  of  an  ancient  Egyptian  house  are  also 
of  much  interest.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  lower  rooms  of  the  house  are  used  as 
workshops,  etc.  There  is  a  scene  of  a  woman  spinning  yarn,  the  thread,  issuing 
from  a  basket  set  on  the  floor,  being  passed  through  a  ring  hung  from  a  support 
projecting  from  a  column,  in  order  to  get  a  long  length  free  for  spinning.  Two 
women  behind  the  spinner  are  engaged  with  a  ball  or  balls  of  yarn  lying  on  the 
floor.  It  is  not  clear  what  the  two  men  in  the  upper  part  of  the  scene  are  doing,  as 
the  detail  here  is  in  very  bad  condition. 

In  the  next  room  on  the  right  three  weavers  are  at  work  sitting  on  low  stools, 
with  their  backs  to  the  observer.  One  of  the  looms,  being  exceptionally  large, 
requires  two  men  to  work  it.  In  the  adjoining  room  a  woman  is  grinding  corn, 
and  above  her  is  a  figure  about  to  put  some  substance  (possibly  dough)  into  a  pan. 
In  the  rooms  above  the  owner  of  the  house  is  seated  in  state,  with  a  serving-girl 
offering  him  drink.  Behind  the  girl  is  a  man  about  to  present  a  bouquet  of  flowers  ; 
with  the  inscription  "  Uab  priest  of  Amen,  Dhutnufer  called  Huia."  The  door 
behind  this  man  is  interesting,  as  it  shows  a  grating  for  ventilation  in  the  upper 
part  of  its  framework.  About  to  enter  this  door  are  two  servants  carrying  flesh 
and  bread  respectively. 

The  upper  scenes  show  either  a  guest  or  the  owner  of  the  tomb  being  fanned, 
and  behind  the  fanner  is  a  servant  bearing  a  jug  of  wine.  The  open  door  in  this 
scene  should  be  noted,  as  it  is  apparently  shown  in  perspective.  To  the  right 
are  various  servants  climbing  stairs  and  bringing  the  necessary  articles  for  the 
feast  above. 

The  row  of  seven  semi-circular  structures  on  the  roof  of  the  house  repre.sent 
corn-bins,  which  are  placed  here  out  of  the  way  of  rats  and  other  pilferers.  Five 
of  these  bins  are  fitted  with  double  doors. 

Pictures  of  important  Egyptian  houses  are  exceedingly  rare  in  the  Theban 
necropolis,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  one  reproduced  here  is  not  more 


The  Origin  of  Polychrome  Borders:  A   Suggestion.  173 

complete.  The  tomb  in  which  this  painting  is  to  be  seen  is  numbered  104  in  the 
list  of  Theban  tombs,  and  belonged  to  a  Royal  Scribe  of  the  name  of  Dhutnufer. 
It  unfortunately  cannot  be  exactly  dated,  but  has  been  conjecturally  ascribed  to 
the  period  of  Amenophis  II  or  Tuthmosis  IV.  The  picture  of  the  house  is  on  the 
eastern  wall  of  the  outer  chamber  of  the  tomb ;  it  has  been  badly  scaled,  first  by  a 
fire  that  occurred  in  the  tomb,  and  subsequently  by  weathering  due  to  the  collapse 
of  the  roof. 

Ernest  Mackay. 


C     174    ) 


A   CEMETERY   PORTAL. 

The  Egyptian  cemeteries  were  not  as  undefined  as  they  now  appear  to  be.  The 
surface  boundaries  would  naturally  weather  away  and  disappear,  but  in  some  cases 
they  can  still  be  traced.  At  Dendereh,  for  instance,  there  is  a  ridge  of  gravel  still 
to  be  seen  for  about  half-a-mile  along  the  desert  side  of  the  cemetery.  At  Abydos 
there  was  a  great  pylon  of  red  granite  leading  west  out  of  the  temple  enclosure  ; 
beyond  this  there  was  a  gateway  in  the  outer  town  wall  of  the  Xllth  dynasty. 
Through  these  gateways  a  road  led  out  to  the  cemetery,  and  after  emerging  from 
the  town  vs'all  it  entered  a  Portal  building,  as  the  approach  to  the  cemetery. 
Probably  there  was  originally  a  boundary  wall  around  the  tombs,  and  this  Portal 
was  the  official  entrance  for  burials. 

Some  clearance  was  made  at  this  Portal  in  1902,  and  the  late  Mr.  Hugh  Stannus 
took  the  plan  here  published.  His  measurements  have  been  added  together,  so  as 
to  state  all  positions  as  distances  westward  from  the  east  face,  or  north  and  south 
from  the  axis  of  the  front.  Thus,  all  the  similar  parts  can  be  at  once  compared  in 
position.  It  seems  strange  that  the  inner  passage  should  not  be  co-axial  with  the 
east  gateway,  but  about  3  inches  to  the  north  of  that.  Yet  the  total  lengths  are 
given  to  the  north  and  south  ends,  and  it  is  impossible  to  assume  an  equal  dis- 
location at  each  end,  hence  the  shift  must  be  in  the  passage  axis.  The  columns 
were  measured  by  the  circumferences,  giving  a  diameter  of  N.  57'8,  2nd  57'5, 
3rd  6o"3  inches.  The  base  circumference  shows  a  diameter  of  87-2  ;  hence  the 
bases  extended  beyond  the  square  foundation  blocks.  The  pavement  probably 
fitted  in  beneath  them  ;  that,  being  doubtless  of  limestone,  has  all  been  stripped  for 
burning. 

The  dimensions  are  irregular,  varying  two  or  three  inches,  as  in  the  temple  of 
Rameses  H,  who  also  built  this  Portal.  The  intention  seems  to  have  been  to  build 
in  terms  of  the  ordinary  cubit.  The  width  of  the  entrance  is  7  cubits,  the  wall  at 
either  side  3  cubits,  the  long  hall  on  either  side  20  cubits  long,  4  wide.  From  the 
best  parts  the  cubit  averages  20'8  inches,  a  usual  value  in  late  times. 

The  western  side  has  not  been  cleared  enough  to  show  the  position  of  the 
foundations  and  ruins.  After  it  had  been  partly  pulled  down  some  brick  walls  were 
patched  on  to  it,  apparently  cutting  into  a  court  of  Osiride  pilasters.  The  still 
complete  eastern  part  differs  entirely  in  plan  from  the  front  of  any  known  temple, 
and  its  ceremonial  purpose  must  have  been  different  from  any  temple  ritual.  From 
the  end  doorways  and  the  covered  space  provided  along  the  passage  way,  it  looks 
as  if  planned  for  the  gathering  or  dispersion  of  funeral  processions.  If,  on  the 
approach  of  a  funeral,  the  cemetery  staff  of  priests  and  officials  flocked  in  at  the  end 
doors,  they  could  then  arrange  themselves  in  the  porticos  at  the  side  of  the  passages 
so  as  to  file  out  in  complete  order  for  parts  of  the  funeral  procession  along  the 
axial  passage.  Probably  the  western  part  contained  a  hall,  or  halls,  for  the  funeral 
ceremonies  before  proceeding  to  the  actual  tomb.  The  building  would  thus  have 
been  a  near  parallel  to  the  modern  chapel  at  the  entrance  of  a  cemetery  in  our  own 
country.  It  would  be  desirable,  for  our  knowledge  of  the  funeral  ceremonial,  to 
completely  clear  this  building  and  restore  the  plan  of  it.  Unfortunately,  I  only 
began  upon  it  during  my  final  months  at  Abydos  in  1903,  and  had  not  time  to 
complete  the  work.  The  various  excavators  in  the  years  since  then  have  not 
attempted  to  clear  fresh  monuments  or  trace  the  history  of  buildings. 


A   Cemetery  Portal. 


^7^ 


'/....^//////f^^///// 


^ 


I 


■^^^  STON  E 
/////    &MCK 


SCALE    \:\Sa 


^L^    V///////M> 


601 


42.11 


314? 


2.77] 


V  r^^^ 


\ 


6)3 


54-8 


TO   C  E  M  E  T.  E  RV 


-^"  W4d" 


TEMPLE 


'/A 


i 


i 


^ 


il 


MO 
Plan  of  the  Cemetery  I'ortai.,  Abydos. 


"1^'J 


ll 


;sj 


89.6 


J^ 


» 

t 

i 

1 

3 

i 

i 

c» 

1 

d 

c 

i 

-2 

l9< 

so.  3 

93 

ft 

i 

i 

:^1 

S-VJ 

1 

M4.6 


FwotA  'Ow  ot  Oltii^ 


M 


J0n 


SCCT'0>W   or    ^AlSCD     STA'ftW*^. 


A 


T-^ 


(3- 


385. 


^ 

3f  -» 

92 

93.fo 

i 

1 

Mi   6 


J  'Oi-6  S~ 


I  -^    1  "I         rrrn    5<.4 


Red 

OTandt 


_5' 


West  Half  of  Court,  Temple  of  Rameses  II,  Abydos. 


1^    in 
01    ■* 


S9 


96 


87  4 


20.4. 


Scetton  of  fociiiq  cow. 


O 


«-Pl«r-> 

\:    A  : 

PUnBi  :|s 

? 

.    ,  .    ..■ 

481 

L- 



1 

90.4 

J6 

1          ''^ 



F 


n 


-^\ 


lis — Lil_Lx5TT — !£*^i: ^-^5X1- 


NoRTH  Half  of  Court,  Temple  of  Rambses  II,  Abydos. 


-->£) 


36.1, 


a.4  52.7 

.44.2 


33 


37.«' 


!UI:36>M^.ntiA.IS^ii, 

s 

s 

;  71.5 

94-7 

«i 

69.4 

»2 

• 

* 

U} 

% 

136 


III. 4 

3 — r" 

a     »! 

:;■.■■.";;:*■.■ 


t]S         ^ 


36.4 


--42 

33.4 


M2J    43   i^3-r 


"5 

% 
J" 

II 

■»i 


tSEf 


72 

-l<l 


^ 


5; 


g4S.7 


256 


33-4 

i3i 

Q 

s" 

46.2    L 

N 

256.6 

■  i 

1  ? 

41.4^ 


86.4 


1      ?i 

4o.^ 


109 


i  i 


Pillars  ore  sontijjbnc  UocJu .   AvrrodC  Ktbakt'dF  UMicS ,  37 
Numb«v  of  Ucks  o(  eaJi  p<llaj  u  oiWit  ui  Wm  luinuroij. 


250 


d 

1   122  4 


82.2 


108.4- 


ni__J| 


s   a 


"f  1 


jt«f»     '\}^^ 


8 

294.4 


,:f   ..I 


Ltmufonc 


44.4 
43.2 


3     90.4 


■     ^"^  V 


-''    59 


Ifo  s.^nof  sIkI/ 


o 


65 

,64.2 

b 

"  S0.6 


II. 4 


No  njn  oT  slulf 


3«.t 


40 


B 


109 


38.7 

12 


Number  ef  Uccii  rtmoinnui  of  coeit 


12 
39.5 


10S.4 


41.2 


Ai_« 


29. 


63.6 


293.6 


laz 


El  "^-^  J^  51.2 1 


Limesuwic 
339.3 


2S.2 


2S.4  y 

South  Side  of  Chambers,  Temple  of  Rameses  II,  Abydos. 


178.*  — 


;4j.7 


72  I  4^-4 


2    5 


8S.4 


-.Z^l    43     124  r- 


1     _ 
40.4^ 


120.4 


r 


74-4        '  <o^2 


L 


2SS.2 


.i- 


■108.4 


2  ^ 

40.6 


3   d 

41.4 


122.1 


<0 

at 

293.6 


102.4 
&>.4 


43.2     ,1 


B 


103.S 


2   ., 

100.6 

1     i 
41.4 

41.4* 

Nui 

inlxrofUoaicfuJi 

-liar 

lS^«n  in  Idi-y  numtrttli. 

* 

N                                                              T 

=                                      rt 

2    J 

100.2 

2   " 

■to.i'^ 

4l.lf 

55    ;;; 


U    r^S- 


!H\R 


<7, 


103.6 


104.2 


293.6 


f^;:, 


;33.-< 

■  J 


_a ISO 


104.2 


CD 


No  >i«ir  >..r. 


No  itWf  i\*n 


S4  »/vWr"~'' 


341.2 


i 


144.2 


92.4 


97.2 


I07 


S 


89 


96 


1J\        vj 


87.4 


East  Side  ok  Chambers,  Te.mple  of  Rameses  II,  Abydos. 


M   2 


l8o  A   Cemetery  Portal. 

As  the  plan  of  the  temple  of  Rameses  II  at  Abydos  was  published  in  our  last 
number  (pp.  136,  137),  especially  in  relation  to  the  views  issued  there,  so  now  it 
seems  desirable  to  preserve  the  record  of  the  actual  measurements  made  by 
Mr.  Stannus,  by  issuing  sectional  plans  with  all  the  details.  Miss  Murray  has  made 
the  drawings  of  these  here  given.  First  is  the  outer  court,  the  two  halves  of  which 
have  the  gateway  repeated  to  show  their  connection,  pp.  176-7.  The  details  of  the 
Osiride  pillars  are  shown  separately  in  the  court ;  as  also  the  section  of  the  double 
stairway  rising  up  to  higher  level  of  the  back.  On  the  succeeding  pages,  178-9, 
are  the  details  of  the  chambers.  These  two  halves  do  not  match  across  the  pages  ; 
more  of  the  back  is  shown  in  178,  but  the  back  on  179  was  not  measured  by 
Mr.  Stannus,  so  the  colonnade  in  front  of  the  chambers  is  included  at  the  bottom  of 
the  page.     All  of  these  plans,  and  that  of  the  Portal,  are  to  the  scale  of  i  to  1 50. 

W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 


(     I8i     ) 


REVIEWS. 


Notes  on  the  Story  of  Siniilie. — Alan  H.  GARDINER,  D.Litt.  8vo.  193  pp. 
(Paris :  Champion,  1916.) 

This  is  essentially  a  specialist's  book  ;  intended  not  for  Egyptologists  in 
general,  but  for  those  whose  interest  lies  in  the  language  only.  As  such  it  is,  like 
all  Dr.  Gardiner's  work,  absolutely  indispensable  to  the  serious  student.  The  mass 
of  information  and  solid  learning  which  it  contains  makes  it  one  of  the  most 
helpful  books  of  recent  years.  Dr.  Gardiner  has  relied,  in  a  way  that  is  un- 
fortunately rare  among  scholars,  on  his  own  common  sense  to  help  him  in  difficult 
and  obscure  passages,  and  his  vast  knowledge  of  the  language  and  literature 
enables  him,  as  a  rule,  to  prove  his  point.     To  take  two  cases  out  of  many :  in 

II.  71-73  the  words  ^=3^  *^  QA>t=^  have  hitherto  been  divided  nn  k'-f,  and 

translated  as  a  question.  Dr.  Gardiner  shows  that  the  form  k^  is  impossible  here 
grammatically,  as  after  the  negative  nn  the  geminated  form  of  the  verb  is  always 
used,  k'-'i ;  the  division  of  the  words  must  then  be  n  nk^-f,  the  verb  being  «/.■»,  "  To 
meditate,  to  think  about."  This  is  the  grammatical  argument.  As  regards  the 
translation  of  the  pas.sage,  Dr.  Gardiner  points  out  that  "  to  interpret  a  negative 
sentence  as  a  rhetorical  question  because  the  negative  does  not  seem  to  fit  is  a 
dangerous  expedient,  and  one  which  must  always  excite  suspicion."  Here  common 
sense  comes  into  play  ;  the  meaning  of  the  whole  of  Sanehat's  speech  is  taken  into 
consideration,  and  the  effect  which  he  must  have  wished  to  convey  to  Amu's  son 
Neshy,  whom  he  desired  both  to  impress  and  to  propitiate,  is  clearly  discussed. 
Consequently  Dr.  Gardiner  is  able  to  translate  the  whole  passage  in  a  manner 
which  carries  conviction  to  the  mind.  But,  perhaps,  one  of  the  best  examples  of 
grammatical  translation,  coupled  with  downright  common  sense,  is  the  discussion 

of  the  meaning  of  ^^^  A^^^~^^^Qft-      "^^   anyone  who   has   worked 

through  the  te.vt  and  tried  to  form  a  mental  picture  of  what  happened  to  Sinuhe 
after  his  interview  with  the  Pharaoh,  Dr.  Gardiner's  discussion  of  this  passage  is 
most  interesting  and  illuminating.  In  fact,  all  Dr.  Gardiner's  discussions  are  worth 
reading,  and  the  book  is  one  which  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  real  student 
of  the  language. 

In  only  one  instance  has  Dr.  Gardiner  failed  to  show  his  usual  acumen,  and 
that  is  as  regards  the  brilliant  (Dr.  Gardiner  calls  it  "  ingenious")  suggestion  of 

Mr.  Gunn  that  the  origin  of  the  Greek  word  Sphinx  is  the  Egyptian  ^^Wr  d  -it  , 

"  Living  image."  On  Dr.  Gardiner's  own  showing,  the  word  sSp  is  determined  with 
a  sphinx  when  it  means  an  image ;  and  though  in  Pharaonic  times  it  is  qualified 
by  the  epitiiet  "nh  when  applied  to  the  king,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  such  an 
expression  would,  by  degrees,  become  limited  to  the  statue  of  the  king  as  a  lion. 
There  is  nothing  unusual  in  this ;  every  language  can  supply  instances  of  such  a 
change.  In  our  own  tongue  the  word  sovereign  means,  properly,  a  ruler  or  king, 
yet  in  common  parlance  the  word  has  come  to  mean  a  special  coin  on  which  a 

M    3 


1 82  Reviews. 

portrait   of  the  monarch  is   stamped.      It  must  also  be  remembered   that  the 

Egyptians  called  an   artist  H  "IT ,  "He  who  makes  alive,"  therefore  it  is  quite 

possible  that  the  "  living  image"  may  be  simply  a  term  for  a  portrait.     We  have 
all  heard  of  a  "  speaking  likeness." 

M.  A.  M. 

La  Pierre  de  Palerme  et  la  Chronologie  de  CAncien  Empire. — G.  Daressv 
{Bull.  Inst.  Fran.  arch.  Orient.).     54  pp. 

This  is  an  important  study  of  the  new  fragments  of  the  Annals,  of  which  an 
account  appeared  in  our  last  number.  M.  Daressy  has  very  carefully  examined 
the  stones  under  the  best  conditions,  and  his  conclusions  must  have  full  weight. 
On  surfaces  so  greatly  worn,  where  only  the  faintest  traces  of  the  essential  signs 
appear,  it  is  certain  that  many  examinations  will  be  needful,  and  many  pairs  of 
eyes  should  be  used.  By  having  kept  back  the  stones  for  six  years  from  the  world 
of  students,  until  the  war  broke  out,  the  Department  in  Cairo  hinders  the  study  of 
this  essential  material  for  several  years  more.  The  hopes  expressed  that  several 
copies  of  the  Annals  existed  in  several  places  are  by  no  means  certain.  In 
so  large  a  monument  many  different  engravers  may  have  been  employed,  and 
variations  in  thickness  and  lines  might  occur ;  the  source  of  any  pieces  outside  of 
Minieh  is  by  no  means  sure,  as  only  one  has  been  found  at  Memphis,  and  that 
only  picked  out  of  a  basket  of  fragments  of  unknown  origin. 

The  first  important  reading  is  that  of  the  king  Athet,  where  traces  of  three 
strokes  in  the  ka  name  were  seen  by  Maspero,  and  are  visible  in  the  photograph, 
agreeing  well  with  King  Zer.  M.  Daressy  agrees  that  Zer  is  the  certain  reading 
of  the  king's  name,  and  not  Khent  as  mistakenly  read.  But  strangely  he  does 
not  see  the  sign  Zer  in  the  three  strokes  visible,  but  would  read  it  Kho-sekhem.  It 
seems  very  improbable  that  this  king  could  come  in  the  midst  of  the  compact 
series  of  the  Royal  Tombs,  or  that  his  style  of  work  could  belong  early  in  the  1st 
dynasty ;  on  the  contrary,  by  the  name,  he  is  evidently  near  Kho-sekhemui,  and 
of  the  dynasty  of  Hetep-sekhemui,  the  sekhemui,  or  two  powers  of  Horus  and  Set, 
being  prominent  in  the  Ilnd  dynasty.  There  seems  no  ground  for  transposing 
a  king  who  so  obviously  belongs  to  a  later  group. 

A  suggestion  is  made  that  the  sign  of  the  king  seated  with  full  insignia  is 
equivalent  to  the  iiesut  bati  and  nebti  names.  But  as  it  is  agreed  that  they  all 
appear  together  under  the  reign  of  Nefer-ar-ka-ra,  the  conjecture  hardly  seems 
worth  proposing. 

An  interesting  new  view  is  given  of  the  Her-nub  title.  Snefru  has  one  falcon, 
Khufu  two,  Dadefra  three,  over  the  nub.  The  nub  it  is  proposed  to  read  in  the 
derived  sense  of "  to  cast,  model,  or  fashion,"  and  connected  with  resurrection  or 
renovation,  as  in  the  nub  hall  of  the  temple.  Hence  the  Her-nub  is  translated 
the  "  renewal  of  a  god."  Why  ^^-newal  should  be  implied  is  not  clear.  On  the 
proposed  value  of  nub  it  might  mean  "  made  a  god,"  or  "  made  Horus,"  that  is,  the 
king  as  Horus  incarnate.  The  meaning  of  the  single,  double,  and  triple  falcons 
is  not  suggested.  On  p.  204  is  a  most  suggestive  arrangement  of  the  IVth  dynasty, 
showing  the  less  important  kings  as  brothers  of  the  great  kings,  Radadef  being 
brother  of  Khufu.  Beside  him  we  know  of  Khnum-khuf  as  certainly  a  third. 
What  if  the  two  falcons  of  Khufu  refer  to  a  joint  reign  of  Khufu  and  Khnum-khuf, 
and  the  three  falcons  of  Dadefra  to  a  triple  co-regency  of  Khufu,  Khnum-khuf, 
and  Dadefra  all  together?     This  is  at  least  an  hypothesis  to  be  tried. 


Reviews.  183 

The  name  of  the  mother  of  Athet  is  recognised  as  Hapt,  with  the  title  of 
priestess,  khend,  before  it.     Many  minor  readings  follow  which  should  be  utilised. 

On  reaching  the  reign  which  is  identified  in  our  last  number  with  Semerkhet, 
M.  Dare.ssy  sees  traces  of  the  name  of  King  Qa,  and  of  the  name  Qebh.  This 
assumes  that  Qebh  was  the  real  name  of  this  king,  whereas  the  contemporary 
remains  read  Sen,  and  Qebh  is  only  a  late  mis-reading  of  the  true  name.  This 
identification,  therefore,  cannot  be  accepted.  The  traces  which  are  supposed  to 
be  the  h  of  Qebh  are  really  the  long  stick  held  by  the  man  in  the  name  of 
Semerkhet. 

Two  of  the  pieces  of  the  Cairo  Annals  are  stated  to  really  join,  a  matter  which, 
of  course,  we  must  accept,  as  it  has  been  verified  in  handling  the  pieces.  The  habit 
of  assuming  that  documents  are  in  error  now  leads  to  saying  that  on  the  Palermo 
Annals  there  is  a  mistake  in  putting  two  years  of  cattle  census  consecutive  instead 
of  biennially.  It  seems  much  more  likely  that  we  do  not  know  if  a  census  was 
irregularly  deferred  or  repeated  because  of  errors.  To  boldly  state  that  an  error 
has  been  made  in  the  Annals,  when  we  know  nothing  of  the  circumstances,  is  far 
too  self-sufficient.  We  must  all  thank  M.  Daressy  for  a  very  careful  fresh  reading 
of  the  stone,  to  which  others  will  doubtless  add  many  more  examinations  when 
peace  permits. 

We  now  reach  what  is  the  key  to  all  the  rest  of  this  Paper,  on  which  is  based 
a  reconstruction  of  the  entire  chronology.  This  rests  upon  an  estimate  of  the 
length  of  the  slab  or  slabs  by  means  of  the  continuance  of  the  reigns  of  the  Vth 
dynasty  from  one  register  to  as  far  along  in  the  next  register  ;  and  an  estimate  of 
the  height  by  the  fact  of  a  hinge  socket  at  one  edge  implying  a  threshold,  which 
is  presumed  to  be  of  a  double  door. 

To  take  first  the  question  of  the  total  length  of  the  slabs.  The  occurrence  of 
years  of  Sahura  in  superposed  registers,  the  middle  of  the  4th  coming  over  the  end 
of  the  14th  year,  indicates  9^  years  of  Sahura  in  the  length.  The  end  of  the  loth 
year  of  Neferkara  coming  just  beneath  the  beginning  of  his  ist  year,  indicates 
10  years  of  his  reign  in  the  length.  These  10  years  M.  Daressy  extends,  for  some 
unstated  reasons,  to  12  spaces,  and  adds  a  border  of  half  a  space  each  side  and  so 
arrives  at  13  spaces  for  the  whole.  The  evidence  of  the  stone  does  not  seem  to 
prove  more  than  gi  or  10  spaces.  The  length  of  the  spaces  was  not  equal.  In  the 
very  brief  entries  of  the  first  three  dynasties,  each  line  has  a  different  size  of  space. 
In  the  reign  of  Sneferu,  of  which  we  have  only  three  spaces,  they  vary  in  size  as 
3  to  4.  Only  two  complete  spaces  can  be  traced  in  the  Vth  dynasty,  and  those 
differ,  showing  that  they  were  not  laid  out  by  measure,  but  depended  in  each  year 
on  the  amount  of  inscription  of  the  year.  This  is  also  indicated,  if  we  grant  any 
value  to  the  numbers  in  Manetho  (which  are  correct  for  Sahura),  by  the  space  of 
10  years  above  named  containing  also  20  years  of  Userkaf,  and  26  years  of  Shep- 
seshaf  and  Userkaf.  The  measurable  length  of  a  year  of  Userkaf  7'8  inches,  or 
Sahura  8"2  inches,  can  by  no  means  be  safely  applied  to  all  the  missing  parts.  It 
indicates  about  82  inches  for  the  length,  if  all  the  years  of  those  kings  were  alike, 
and  if  the  rest  of  Userkaf's  years  and  those  of  Shepseshaf  were  only  half  as  fully 
recorded.  The  length  of  107  inches,  adopted  by  M.  Daressy,  cannot  be  taken  as 
more  than  one  of  many  possibilities,  and  any  reconstruction  based  on  that  is 
equally  uncertain. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  question  of  height.  The  edge  of  a  pivot  hole  is  described 
as  being  at  the  top  end  of  the  piece.  It  is  assumed  that  this  was  for  one  half  of  a 
double  door,  it  is  also  assumed  that  it  was  for  the  stationary  half,  and  as  no  bolt  hole 

M  4 


184  Rnneivs. 

is  seen  in  the  slab,  therefore  the  length  of  the  slab  does  not  reach  the  middle.  From 
this  position  it  would  result  that  the  doorway  had  a  clear  opening  of  30'9  inches, 
and  that  the  stone  with  a  guessed  amount  for  border  would  be  2  cubits,  4r2  inches 
high.  But  it  does  not  seem  at  all  known  that  it  was  for  a  double  door,  for  under 
three  feet  wide  a  single  door  is  more  likely ;  nor  is  it  known  at  all  where  the  axis 
came  beyond  the  end  of  the  slab,  if  the  door  were  double ;  nor  is  it  at  all  known 
whether  the  height  of  the  slab  went  across  the  doorway  ;  it  may  have  been  at  right 
angles  to  that.  There  does  not  seem  then  to  be  any  real  definition  of  the  size  in 
either  direction  by  the  proposals  brought  forward.  Hence  the  whole  question  of 
reconstruction,  which  is  dealt  with  in  25  pages,  remains  in  air,  so  far  as  any  proof 
goes.  One  point  only  is  clearly  to  be  remembered,  that  the  Annals  were  engraved 
on  a  row  of  slabs,  and  not  on  a  single  slab;  for  the  thickness  of  2  or  2i  inches 
precludes  a  greater  length  than  about  40  inches  at  the  outside.  A  longer  slab 
of  that  thickness  would  be  too  easily  broken  by  its  own  weight  in  moving  it. 

Some  of  the  remarks  of  M.  Daressy  on  the  historical  position  should  be  noted. 
He  believes  that  there  were  four  rows  of  predynastic  figures  at  the  beginning,  and 
that  these  included  the  kings,  the  followers  of  Horus  (as  in  the  Turin  Papyrus),  and 
the  spirits  of  Buto  and  Hierakonpolis,  beginning  with  the  gods. 

The  order  of  the  kings  in  the  IVth  dynasty  has  long  been  a  difficulty.  The 
main  kings  are  well  known,  yet  other  kings  seemed  by  their  remains  to  come 
between  them.  A  system  of  co-regencies  is  proposed,  by  which  these  minor  kings 
were  reigning  with  the  great  kings.  We  may  perhaps  go  further  on  this  line,  with 
tentative  explanations.  What  if  the  long  reigns  of  63  years  of  Khufu  and  66  or 
56  years  of  Khafra  were  correct  and  included  these  minor  reigns  ?  What  if  the 
cause  of  these  minor  reigns  was  the  appointment  of  a  crown  prince  as  ruler  at  the 
sed  festival,  and  if  he  died  before  the  elder  king  the  appointment  of  a  second 
viceroy?  The  table  of  M.  Daressy  is  given  here,  only  adding  Khnum-khufu  on 
monumental  grounds.  The  Arabic  numerals  are  in  the  order  of  the  Turin  Papyrus, 
the  Roman  numerals  in  the  order  of  Manetho.  The  lines  of  genealogic  descent 
are  omitted  as  they  are  far  from  certain  : 

I.  Snefru  =  Soris  (I). 
2.  Khufu  =  Soufis  (H).      Khnum-khuf.        3.  Dedefra  =  Ratoises  (V). 
4.  Khafra  =  Soufis  (HI).  5.  (Bakara  =)Bikheris  (VI). 

6.  Menkaura  =  Menkheres  (IV).  7.  (Dedefptah=)Thamphthis(VIII).  8.  .v. 
9.  Shepses  kaf  =  Seberkheres  (VII). 

Thus,  the  Turin  Papyrus  went  down  the  main  kings,  and  then  noted  the 
co-regents.  The  list  of  Manetho  took  them  in  their  historical  order.  This  seems  a 
very  likely  arrangement ;  and  if  the  co-regents  were  the  j^</-feast  viceroys,  who 
died  before  succeeding  as  sole  kings,  the  e.xplanation  would  be  well  completed. 

A  proposal  is  then  made  that  Herodotus  (and  from  him  Diodorus)  confused 
the  names  of  Vth  and  XXVth  dynasty  kings,  and  so  brought  in  the  Ethiopians 
after  the  Pyramid  builders.  The  explanation  of  M.  Apostolides  that  a  roll  of  MS. 
was  misplaced  in  the  second  book  of  Herodotus  seems  a  much  better  explanation. 
That  suggestion  has  been  greatly  confirmed  by  tracing  the  division  of  the  second 
book  into  twelve  rolls,  and  by  the  catchwords  of  the  beginning  of  the  misplaced 
rolls  being  alike,  and  .so  leading  to  confusion. 

There  is  then  much  that  must  be  carefully  recognised  in  this  long  study  of  the 
early  dynasties,  though  several  cardinal  points  in  it  do  not  commend  themselves 
to  others. 


Reviews.  185 

Le  Cercueil  de  Klin-n-ateu. — G.  Daressy  {Bull.  Inst.  Fran.  arch.  Orient., 
T.  XII). 

This  Paper  gives  a  detailed  description  of  the  coffin  found  in  the  tomb  at  Biban 
el-Meluk  in  iQOf.  The  other  objects  found  in  that  burial  have  been  published,  but 
the  coffin  was  in  so  decayed  and  damaged  a  state  that  nothing  could  be  done  till  it 
had  been  restored.  As  this  has  now  been  done  so  far  as  possible  in  the  Cairo 
Museum,  M.  Daressy — always  diligent  to  issue  fresh  documents — has  given  a 
detailed  description  of  it. 

The  head  of  the  coffin  was  covered  with  curls  carved  in  ebony,  and  fixed  with 
jjegs.  On  the  front  of  it  was  a  bronze  uraeus,  with  the  Aten  cartouches  upon  it,  and 
the  tail  waving  up  to  the  top  of  the  head.  The  whole  was  gilt,  the  sheet  of  gold 
forming  the  face  had  been  anciently  robbed.  The  eyes  were  inlaid,  the  eyelids  and 
brows  with  blue  glass.  The  wooden  beard  was  inlaid  with  lazuli  between  ribs  ol 
gilding.  The  body  was  entirely  wrought  in  feather-work  inlays,  let  into  the  wood, 
of  about  1,500  pieces,  all  different  in  shape  and  size.  The  inlay  was  of  carnelian, 
dark  blue  glass  imitating  lazuli,  light  blue  glass  for  turquoise,  and  selenite 
crystallised. 

The  inscription  bears  a  strange  history.  The  cartouches  have  all  been 
destroyed,  in  hatred  of  the  person.  But  the  titles  are  those  of  Akhenaten 
undoubtedly.  Yet  this  inscription  has  been  altered,  and  one  less-changed  deter- 
minative shows  that  it  was  originally  for  a  woman.  As  she  is  called  "the  beautiful 
child  of  the  Aten,"  it  could  not  be  for  any  queen  earlier  than  Tyi ;  and  as  having 
been  altered  for  Akhenaten,  it  must  be  for  a  queen  who  died  before  him.  This 
seems  to  fix  it  as  made  for  Queen  Tyi.  M.  Daressy  then  gives  a  translation  of  the 
restored  original  te.xt,  consisting  of  the  usual  phrases  of  the  period,  and  notes  how 
each  of  the  individual  references  was  altered. 

As  to  the  identity  of  the  body  found  in  this  coffin,  M.  Daressy  concludes  that 
Akhenaten  was  buried  at  Tell  Amarna,  as  his  tomb  is  there,  and  he  had  vowed 
never  to  leave  his  new  capital.  Hence  the  suggestion  is  made  that  the  body  was 
that  of  Tutonkhamen,  the  first  king  to  cast  aside  the  Aten,  and  to  return  to  Thebes  ; 
if  so,  the  heads  on  the  canopic  jars  found  with  the  coffin  will  be  those  of 
Tutonkhamen,  and  a  resemblance  to  his  portraits  is  affirmed. 

L'Egypte  Celeste.     G.  Dares.SY  {Btill.  Inst.  Fran.  arch.  Orient.  T.  XII). 

In  this  Paper  the  Zodiacal  lists  are  used  which  are  in  more  regular  order 
than  the  signs  on  the  planisphere  of  Dendereh.  The  signs  in  these  lists  are 
described,  and  compared  with  the  series  of  gods  from  Nubia  to  the  Delta.  Many 
correspondences  are  noted,  and  the  conclusion  as  to  the  celestial  parallel  to  the 
earthly  kingdom  shown  to  be  probable.  The  principal  connections  are :  Saturn, 
Horqa  =  Meharraqa  Horqa ;  Aquarius,  Nile  figure  pouring  out  of  two  vases  = 
Oerti,  the  two  fountains  of  the  Nile  at  the  Cataract ;  Hordeshert,  Mars  =  Horus 
of  Edfu ;  Pisces,  two  fishes  =  Latus  of  Latopolis  ;  Jupiter,  Horus  =  Mentu  of 
Hcrmonthis  ;  Ram  =  Amen  of  Thebes ;  Double  god,  falcon  and  Venus  planet  = 
Hathor  of  Dendereh ;  Twins  =  Anhur  and  Mehyt  of  Thinis ;  Woman  holding 
child  =  Merymutf,  Khnem  of  Lycopolis  ;  Virgo  =  Hathor  of  Cusae ;  Sagittarius 
with  heads  of  man  and  ram  =  Hershefi  of  Heracleopolis.  The  other  connections 
are  less  definite,  and  often  can  only  be  traced  by  a  play  upon  words.  These  are, 
however,  enough  to  show  how  with  some  ingenuity  the  Egyptians  had  modified 
the  signs  of  external  origin,  so  as  to  link  them  with  a  geographical  order  of 
appropriate  gods. 


(     i86    ) 


NOTES   AND   NEWS. 


Some  remarks  on  Miss  Murray's  Paper  on  "  The  Egyptian  Elements  in  the 
Grail  Romance  "  have  been  received  from  Miss  Jessie  Weston.  Her  special  know- 
ledge of  the  Grail  literature  makes  these  remarks  welcome,  though  we  have  made 
some  abbreviation,  as  the  subject  lies  mostly  outside  of  our  Egyptian  scope.  She 
writes: — The  geographical  parallels  in  which  Miss  Murray  is  interested  are  re- 
stricted to  the  Grand- Saint- Graal,  a  romance  which,  all  critics  of  the  cycle  are 
now  agreed,  belongs  to  the  latest  stage  of  cyclic  redaction.  It  is  an  enlargement 
and  extension  of  Borron's  Joseph,  constructed  with  a  view  to  the  donnees  of  the 
prose  Lancelot  in  its  final  form  ;  and  the  numerous  cross-references  between  Grand- 
Saint-Graal,  Lancelot,  and  Queste,  point  to  a  redaction  carried  out  with  a  systematic 
purpose  in  view,  and  very  possibly  under  the  direction  of  one  guiding  hand.  The 
special  geographical  features,  however,  have  affected  the  Lancelot  not  at  all,  and 
the  Queste  but  slightly,  i^.,  in  the  introduction  of  Mordrains,  and  the  mention  of 
Sarras  as  the  final  home  of  the  Grail. 

The  early  stages  of  the  Grail  cycle,  the  independent  poems,  the  original 
Borron  trilogy,  show  no  signs  of  such  a  contamination.  Thus,  I  would  deprecate 
the  form  of  the  title  as  misleading ;  "  Egyptian  Elements  in  a  Grail  Romance " 
would  be  more  correct.  Readers  should  surely  be  warned  that  the  romance  in 
question  is  one  to  which  modern  scholars  attach  a  very  restricted  importance — it  is 
too  late  to  be  of  value  as  evidence  for  sources.     .     .     . 

It  must  be  remembered  that  we  have  at  present  no  critical  text  of  the  romance 
in  question,  nor,  indeed,  of  any  save  the  Parzival.  Dr.  Sommer's  recent  publica- 
tions are  based  on  his  own  selection  of  MSS.,  and,  while  valuable  for  reference,  are 
neither  final  nor  authoritative.  Hence  we  do  not  yet  know  the  precise  form  of  the 
proper  names,  e.g.,  the  Grail  Castle  is  written  Corbe«ic,  Corbenc,  or  Carbonek,  to 
say  nothing  of  minor  variants.  We  can  hardly  speculate  safely  on  the  derivation 
of  the  word  till  we  are  agreed  as  to  its  original  form.  It  may  be  the  deformation 
of  a  Celtic  name,  and,  as  such,  not  have  figured  in  Miss  Murray's  geographical 
group  at  all. 

Yet  the  parallels,  alike  in  place  names  and  liturgical  details,  are  arresting ;  how, 
then,  shall  we  explain  them  ? 

Here  I  would  point  out  that  a  text  of  the  thirteenth  century  ought  not  to  be 
illustrated  from  present-day  ritual,  without  making  it  clear  that  the  Liturgy  in 
question  has  not  undergone  substantial  modification,  and  that  the  parallels  to 
which  attention  is  drawn  really  existed  at  the  time  that  the  romance  was  written. 
Taking  this  for  granted  (and  it  ought  to  be  proved),  it  appears  to  me  that  the 
conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that  the  compiler  of  the  Grand-Saitit-Graal  had  at  his 
disposal,  besides  the  T^orron  Joseph,  the  Lancelot  d^nd  its  Queste,  a  MS.  containing: 
a.  a  Conversion ;  b.  a  Consecration  legend,  which  may  or  may  not  have  been 
associated  with  the  same  hero,  and  which  were  most  probably  connected  with  the 
origins  of  Egyptian  Christianity,  possibly  with  the  foundation  of  some  local  Church. 
There  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  Joseph  of  Arimathea  was  the  original 
protagonist.  I  should  be  inclined  to  think  that  the  stories  were  independent,  and 
that,  the  "  Conversion  "  story  having  been  assigned  to  him,  his  son  was  invented  in 
order  to  connect  him,  tant  bien  que  mal,  with  the  second  tale. 


Notes  and  News.  187 

A  well  known  name  in  Egyptology  was  that  of  M.  Paul  Pierret,  formerly 
Conservator  at  the  Louvre,  who  died  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  at  Versailles, 
at  the  age  of  seventy-nine.  To  every  beginner  the  name  of  Pierret's  Vocabulaire 
is  familiar ;  and,  though  prepared  more  than  forty  years  ago,  it  is  still  useful  for 
quick  reference  where  the  many  heavy  volumes  of  larger  dictionaries  are  not 
needed.  M.  Pierret  entered  the  Louvre  at  the  age  of  thirty-one,  and  was  Con- 
servator from  his  thirty-eighth  to  seventieth  year.  His  earliest  publication  was 
the  Etudes  egyptologiques,  1873-78,  in  which  the  inscriptions  of  the  Louvre  are 
the  most  important  part,  as  being  the  only  publication  of  that  material.  Then 
quickly  followed  the  Vocabulaire  \n  \'i'j'^,Dictionnaire  d'archeologie  cgyptienne,  1875, 
Catalogue de  la  salle liistorique,  \%TJ ,  Pantheon  egyptien,  1881,  Decret  de  Canape,  1881, 
Livre  des  Morts,  1882,  and  Monuments  de  I'^gypte  et  de  I'^thiopte,  1885.  Thus  all 
his  published  work  was  issued  between  the  ages  of  thirty-seven  and  forty-nine ; 
it  has  the  general  character  of  diligent  and  practical  compilation,  much  of  which 
has  not  been  superseded  by  any  fuller  publication. 

Enquiries  made  by  Dr.  Gordon,  on  behalf  of  the  Philadelphia  Museum,  now 
prove  that  the  action  of  that  Museum  in  taking  over  a  site  already  occupied  by  the 
British  School  was  based  entirely  on  the  official  statements  of  the  Department  of 
Antiquities,  and  was  quite  legally  in  order  on  that  ground.  Unfortunately,  this 
course  was  followed  without  the  smallest  reference  or  warning  to  the  British  School, 
as  excavators  of  the  site  for  six  years  past.  We  hope  that  the  incorrect  statements 
made  in  Philadelphia,  that  we  had  renounced  the  site,  and  that  it  would  be  all 
worked  by  others,  will  be  withdrawn. 

France  has  suffered  severe  losses  among  the  Egyptologists.  Mons.  A.  J.  Reinach 
has  been  missing  since  the  first  month  of  the  war.  Capt.  Weill  is  severely  wounded. 
M.  Sollas  is  wounded.  M.  Daumas,  the  artist  of  the  Institut  Archeologique,  is 
wounded.  Besides  these  there  are  the  sad  losses  of  the  sons  of  Sir  Gaston  Maspero 
and  M.  Daressy,  already  known  to  our  readers. 

We  should  have  congratulated  M.  Foucart  sooner  on  his  Directorship  of  the 
Institut  Archeologique  at  Cairo.  This  post  has  usually  been  the  training  ground  for 
future  Directors  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities. 

We  have  to  announce  the  promotion  of  Lieut.  Engelbach  to  be  Captain,  R.E. 
Mr.  Mackay  has  joined  the  Camel  Corps. 

Mr.  Brunton  has  resigned  his  Red  Cross  administration,  to  the  great  regret  of 
the  staff  at  Netley,  and  passed  for  the  Artists'  Corps. 


(     '88     ) 


THE   PORTRAITS. 

Les  Monuments  dits  Hycsos. — Par  Jean  Capart.  8vo,  46  pp.,  29  figs.  1914. 
(Bruxelles,  Vromant.) 

Just  before  the  war,  the  curator  of  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  Brussels  issued — 
from  what  was  then  a  peaceful  and  happy  land — a  study  of  importance  in  early 
art.  Expecting  that  it  would  raise  a  general  discussion,  we  did  not  then  notice  it 
As  now  it  seems  that  the  world  is  hopelessly  rent  for  long  to  come,  by  the  policy 
of  "  world-power  or  going  under,"  and  it  will  be  many  years  before  fresh  work  can 
be  done,  a  summary  of  this  pamphlet  should  be  put  forward. 


Sphinx  of  Tams.    Cairo  Museu.m. 
Compare  Beard  of  opposite  Figure. 


The  strange  group  of  royal  monuments,  mainly  lound  at  Tanis,  differing  from 
any  Egyptian  sculptures,  was  assigned  at  first  to  the  Hyksos  by  Mariette,  and  to 
this  day  they  are  often  so  called  with  some  apology.  Other  works  akin  to  these 
were  noticed  later,  a  bust  in  the  Fayum,  and  another  which  had  been  brought  to 
Rome  and  was  found  on  the  Esquiline.  By  1893  Gol^nischeff  saw  a  resemblance  to 
the  statues  of  Amenemhat  III,  and  attributed  all  these  works  to  the  Xllth  dynasty. 
The  style  of  work  in  every  respect,  and  the  far  greater  strength  and  heaviness  of 
the  face,  forbade  such  an  identification.  The  resemblance  might  indicate  a  descent 
from  the  same  stock.  That  all  the  Hyksos  inscriptions  on  the  figures  were 
re-appropriations  was  clear  enough,  and  the  only  question  was,  when  before  that 
age  could  such  sculptures  have  been  done?  The  next  location  for  them  was  to 
ascribe  them  to  the  oriental  invaders  who  overthrew  the  Old  Kingdom.  As  we 
had  no  statuary  of  those  people,  there  was  nothing  to  contradict,  or  to  support, 
.such  a  view.     Now  Dr.  Capart  brings  up  the  proposal  that  this  mysterious  group 


The  Portraits. 


189 


belongs  to  the  archaic  art  before  the  IVth  dynasty,  and  that  it  was  through  such 
work  as  this  that  the  Egyptians  reached  the  supreme  art  of  the  days  of  Khufu  and 
Khafra. 

The  subjecf-has  been  much  complicated  by  the  carefully  carved  appropriations 
of  such  sculptures  by  Pasebkhanu  I  of  the  XXIst  dynasty.  His  name  on  the  chest 
of  each  sphinx  is  well  and  deeply  cut,  and  the  surface  has  been  fully  cleared  before 
from  all  traces  of  earlier  inscription.  This,  however,  does  not  deceive  as  to  the 
maker,  for  the  erased  Hyksos  inscriptions  on  the  shoulders  show  a  far  earlier  date. 


I'OTiEKY  Lion  or  Hierako.ntoi.is. 


The  case  is  rather  different  with  the  two  so-called  fish  offerers.  On  this  group 
of  Hapi  figures  holding  altars  there  is  no  earlier  inscription,  and  that  of  Paseb- 
khanu is  so  finely  and  boldly  cut  that  many — perhaps  most — writers  granted  these 
to  be  original  work  of  the  XXIst  dynasty  and  so  accepted  the  idea  of  a  Tanite 
school  of  sculpture  keeping  up  these  peculiarities  for  a  thousand  years  or  more. 
An  important  comparison  is  raised  between  the  three  Hapi  statues — one  of 
Tehutmes  III,  this  of  Pasebkhanu,  and  one  of  Sheshenq,  just  after.  The  details 
of  the  altar  before  the  figure  in  the  XVIIIth  and  XXIInd  dynasties  nearly  agree, 


lyo 


The  Portraits. 


that  inscribed  in  the  XX  1st  dynasty  is  quite  different.  This  is  a  good  reason  for 
its  being  a  much  earlier  work.  The  peculiar  thick  ringlets  of  hair  and  arrangement 
of  it  are  .shown  to  be  closely  the  same  on  the  Tanite  group  as  on  the  figure  now  in 
Rome.  Hence  it  seems  that  the  whole  of  this  class  of  sculpture  must  be  connected, 
and  belongs  to  a  special  age  rather  than  to  a  special  locality. 

The  comparisons  brought  forward  as  links  with  this  group  are  especially, 
(l)  the  beard  sweeping  down  from  the  temple  along  the  jaw  below  the  mouth,  alike 
in  the  Fayum  figure  and  the  fish  offerers,  and  rather  slighter  in  the  Roman  figure ; 
this  is  like  the  beard  on  a  Hierakonpolis  ivory  head,  and  a  statuette  clearly  of 
prehistoric  age  in  the  MacGregor  Collection  ;  (2)  the  flat  circular  spread  of  hair 
round  the  faces  of  the  sphinxes,  unlike  any  Egyptian  sphinx,  but  like  the  disc 
of  hair  around  the  lion  from  Hierakonpolis  and  the  lion  altar  from  Saqqara,  both 
of  the  early  dynasties ;  (3)  the  thick  ringlets  of  hair  of  the  Hapi  figures  and  the 
Rome  bust,  like  the  shorter,  thick,  ringlets  of  the  kneeling  king  of  Hierakonpolis. 
Another  comparison  is  the  semi-circular  pendant  over  the  shoulder  of  the  Fayum 


Ivory  Head  of  Hierako.npolis. 
Compare  Portrait  of  Hapi  Figures. 


figure  like  the  similar  pendant  over  the  shoulder  of  a  seated  figure  of  Onkh-tekh  at 
Leyden,  and  borne  by  the  attendant  of  Narmer  on  the  palette.  This  is  not  of 
much  value  as  it  occurs  with  the  panther-skin  dress  of  a  priest  of  Khensu,  and  is 
probably  a  priestly  decoration  which  continued  for  ages.  On  the  ground  of  these 
comparisons.  Dr.  Capart  proposes  to  see  a  close  relation  between  these  peculiar 
figures  and  the  early  dynastic  or  prehi-storic  stj'le,  and  claims  a  position  before  the 
IVth  dynasty  for  them. 

Let  us  now  review  the  periods  before  the  Hyksos  Age,  when  these  figures  were 
already  old. 

In  the  XHth  dynasty  we  know  the  .style  in  use  from  many  examples,  and 
there  is  no  trace  of  the  peculiarities  named  above.  There  is  a  slight  facial  resem- 
blance to  some  of  the  later  kings  of  the  XHth  dynasty,  and  some  of  the  heads 
which  have  been  called  Hyksos — as  the  colossi  of  Bubastis — are  probably  of  the 
XUth ;  but  the  characteristic  work  cannot  be  placed  there. 


The  Portraits. 


191 


In  the  dark  age  of  the  Vllth  to  Xth  dynasties  there  are  no  comparisons,  and 
Dr.  Capart  relies  on  the  argument  that  such  works  as  these  would  imply  a  total 
break  of  the  traditional  style  which  appears  to  be  unbroken  from  the  Old  to  the 
Middle  Kingdom.  Certainly  in  relief  sculpture  the  decay  was  gentle  and  continuous 
until  the  Xlth  dynasty  renascence. 

In  the  great  age  of  the  IVth  to  the  Vlth  dynasties  there  is  no  possible  place 
for  a  different  style. 


Figure  of  King  of  Hierakonpolis. 
Compare  Hair  of  Esquiline  Portrait. 


In  the  Ilnd  and  Ilird  dynasties  we  have  the  two  seated  figures  of  Kho-sekhem, 
the  kneeling  granite  figure  at  Cairo,  the  panels  at  Hesy,  and  several  figures  which 
must  belong  here,  as  Sepa  and  Nesa,  the  figures  of  Leyden,  etc.  In  all  these, 
though  some  slight  approaches  to  the  peculiar  style  may  be  detected,  yet  the  usual 
chain  of  Egyptian  development  leaves  no  room  for  such  great  differences. 

In  the  1st  dynasty  there  is  the  ivory  king  of  Abydos,  and  several  other  ivory 
figures  from  there,  but  all  purely  Egyptian.     At  Hierakonpolis  not  a  single  ivory 


192  The  Portraits. 

figure  has  the  heavy  ringlets  of  hair,  and  only  some  have  the  all-round  beard,  which 
after  all  is  known  among  Bedawy  and  other  races.  The  relief  figures  of  Narmer 
and  of  his  men  show  no  trace  of  the  peculiar  style  in  any  way. 

We  are  driven  back  then,  step  by  step,  to  the  unknown  age  of  the  predynastic 
princes  of  Heliopolis  and  the  Delta,  and  the  comparison  of  the  beard  in  two  or 
three  cases,  and  the  approach  to  the  ringlets  of  the  kneeling  king,  are  the  only  help 
in  this  period.  It  seems  that  we  must  definitely  say  that  there  is  no  other  choice 
than  the  predynastic,  or  an  intrusive  art  of  some  later  period  which  did  not  break 
up  the  Egyptian  style.  Seeing  that  hard-stone  carving  seems  to  have  been  unknown 
in  the  1st  dynasty,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  an  earlier  age  had  surpassed  that 
great  time  of  development.  If  we  look  to  any  later  age  we  must  grant  that  it  is 
quite  as  difficult  to  put  an  intrusive  art  in  during  the  Ist-IIIrd  dynasties  as  it 
would  be  in  the  Vllth-Xth  dynasties.  In  either  case  it  would  break  across  the 
Egyptian  development.  But  as  the  interval  VII-X  is  of  over  four  centuries'  length, 
there  is  much  more  time  for  such  a  break  than  there  is  between  Narmer,  the  ivor}- 
king  of  Abydos,  the  granite  kneeler,  Kho-sekhem,  the  Hesy  panels,  and  the  early 
private  statues.  These  form  a  chain  of  two  or  more  points  in  each  dynasty,  where 
no  great  change  can  be  presumed. 

The  resemblances  between  the  peculiar  style  and  the  predynastic  figures 
would  be  quite  accounted  for,  if  the  race  of  these  early  figures  again  penetrated 
Egypt  in  later  times,  and  there  is  nothing  against  such  movement  having  occurred. 
The  entry  of  such  people  just  before  the  Middle  Kingdom  would  best  account  for 
the  facial  resemblances  between  them  and  the  kings  of  that  age. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  still  seems  most  probable  that  this  peculiar  style 
of  heavy  ringlets,  massive  face,  and  low  beard,  belongs  to  the  Eastern  invaders  who 
broke  up  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  who  had  some  kinship  with  other  people  who 
appear  at  the  beginning  of  the  dynasties.  The  only  alternative  is  to  place  the 
highly  finished  immense  figures  of  black  granite  in  a  totally  unknown  period, 
before  the  rising  art  of  the  1st  dynasty. 


^ 


^ 


BUST    FOUND    ON    THE    ESQUILINE,    ROME. 

IMPORTED     FROM    EGYPT. 
BLACK  GRANITE.  THERMAE  MUSEUM. 


BUST    FOUND    AT    THE    CAPITAL    OF    THE    FAYUM. 

IN    INSIGNIA    OF    A    HIGH    PRIEST    OF    KHONSU. 

GREY    GRANITE.  CAIRO    MUSEUM. 


'V 


.(\ 


^ 


TANIS. 


JOINT    STATUES    OF    HAPI    WITH    ALTARS. 

CAIRO    MUSEUM. 


ANCIENT 
EGYPT 


1917.  Part  I. 

CONTENTS. 


1.  Water  Lilies  of  Egypt. 
Dr.  W.  D.  Spanton. 

2.  An  Architectural  Sketch. 

N.   DE  G.  Davies. 

3.  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 

W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 

4.  Periodicals: — 
Liverpool  Annals. 
Bulletin  de  L'Institut  ^gyptien. 
Iron  and  Steel  Institute. 

5.  Notes  and  News. 
EDITOR,    PROF.  FLINDERS  PETRIE,  F.R.S.,  F.B.A. 

Yearly,  71.  Post  Free.  Quarterly  Part,  2s. 

macmillan  and  CO., 

LONDON     AND     NEW     YORK; 

AND 

BRITISH    SCHOOL    OF    ARCHAEOLOGY    IN    EGYPT, 
University   College,    Gower   Street,    London. 


Ancien'T  Egypt.     Net  price  Irom  booksellers  is  2s. 

Subscriptions  for  the  four  quarterly  parts,  prepaid,  post  free,  ys.,  are  received  by 

Hon.  Sec.  "Ancient  Egypt"  (H.  Flinders  Petrie),  University  College,  Gower 

Street,  London,  W.C. 

Books  for  review,  papers  offered  for  insertion,  or  news,  should  be  addressed : — 
Editor  of  "  Ancient  Egypt," 

University  College,  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C. 


4 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


I 
L 


THE    WATER   LILIES   OF   ANCIENT   EGYPT. 

In  this  paper  we  consider  what  was  described  in  an  offering  to  the  Sun-god  Horus 
at  Denderah,  as  "  the  flower  which  was  in  the  beginning,  the  glorious  Lily  of  the 
great  water." 

Much  confusion  exists  among  writers  on  the  subject  from  the  time  of  Herodotus 
onwards,  and  it  has  been  rather  an  interesting  puzzle  to  unravel  some  of  the  errors 
which  have  been  copied  from  one  work  to  another.  The  best  accounts  are  those 
by  Raffenau-Delile  about  one  hundred  years  ago,  and  more  recently  Goodyear  and 
Conard,  the  latter  of  whom  has  cleared  up  many  obscurities.  It  seems  as  if  the 
botanists  on  the  one  hand  had  ignored  the  archaeologists,  and  these  in  their  turn 
did  not  appreciate  botanical  distinctions.  Hence  arose  confusion.  Architects  are 
worse  still,  for  I  once  asked  a  distinguished  ecclesiastical  architect  to  tell  me  some- 
thing about  lotus  and  papyrus  ornamentation,  and  his  reply  was :  "  Oh  1  we  call 
them  all  papyrus " !  We  hear  people  speak  of  the  "  sacred  lotus  of  Egypt," 
whereas  no  lotus  was  anciently  so  called  ;  others  tell  of  the  sacred  lotus  of  India 
or  Japan,  which  is  not  a  lotus  at  all,  but  belongs  to  another  species.  I  want  as  far 
as  I  can  to  clear  this  up,  and  then  to  describe  why  and  how  the  various  water  lilies 
have  been  used  so  as  to  enter  largely  into  the  life  of  Ancient  Egypt. 

The  Nymphaeas  or  water  nymphs  all  belong  to  the  botanical  order 
Nymphaeaceae,  and  of  these  none  were  confined  to  Egypt.  The  sacred  lily  of 
Japan  belongs  to  another  order,  the  Nelumboneae,  and  is  quite  distinct,  and  has 
not  been  seen  in  Egypt  for  a  very  long  period,  though  Herodotus  describes  it  as 
growing  there  when  he  wrbte  2,300  years  ago.  Although  most  of  them  have 
disappeared,  both  the  white  and  blue  water  lilies  are  to  be  found  in  the  still  waters 
of  the  Delta  of  the  Nile  to  this  day,  and  in  some  places  much  farther  south.  In 
England  we  have  two  representatives  of  the  same  order,  N.  Alba  and  Nuphar  Lutea, 
which  are  familiar  enough  :  but  our  progenitors  of  6,000  years  ago  do  not  appear  to 
have  discovered  their  artistic  potentialities.  The  Nymphaea  (Figs.  3,  22)  has 
a  large  leaf  cleft  nearly  to  the  centre,  like  our  pond  lily,  floating  on  the  water. 
The  bud  has  an  envelope  of  four  calyx  leaves  or  .sepaLs,  which  entirely  encase  the 
bud  until  it  opens  :  and  as  it  expands  the  more  delicate  texture  and  colour  of  the 
flower  shows  itself  In  this  way,  when  seen  from  whatever  point  of  view,  the 
opening  flower  shows  three  dark  green  spikes,  symmetrically  divided,  forming 
a  background  to  the  coloured  petals.  As  the  bud  expands,  the  sepals  curve 
downwards.  The  ovary  has  a  rayed  stigma  of  bright  yellow  colour,  from  the  base 
of  which  numerous  flattened  yellow  stamens  diverge.     When  the  flower  comes  to 


2  The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 

seed,  the  ovary  becomes  bulbous,  like  a  poppy  (Fig.  51),  and  sinks  under  water; 
whereas,  during  the  period  of  flowering  the  stem  is  erect.  The  leaf  stalks  spring 
from  the  root  (Fig.  17),  and  the  leaves  always  float  on  the  surface.  The  seed  pod 
is  like  that  of  the  poppy,  having  a  similar  rayed  stigma  (Fig.  51),  and  containing 
within  it  numerous  dark  small  seeds. 

The   White  and  Blue  Lotus. 

The  two  Nymphaeas  found  in  the  palmy  days  of  Ancient  Egypt  were  the 
N.  Lotus  and  the  N.  Caerulea,  i.e.,  the  white  and  the  blue  varieties.  They  vary 
somewhat  in  form  and  in  their  habits  ;  both  were  extensively  used  for  decoration, 
as  I  shall  describe  later.  The  blooms  of  the  N.  Lotus  (Figs.  4,  6,  7)  are  fragrant, 
the  odour  being  "  piquante,"  usually  pure  white,  but  there  is  a  variety  termed  Rosea 
(Fig.  5)  with  rose-coloured  petals  found  among  them.  And  in  one  of  the  coloured 
wall  paintings  of  an  early  dynasty  I  find  this  clearly  depicted.  There  is  a  specimen 
in  Kew  Gardens  marked  N.  Lotus,  of  a  lovely  red  throughout,  except  the  stamens 
which  are  yellow  and  spring  from  the  summit  instead  of  the  base  of  the  ovary. 

The  N.  Caerulea  (Figs,  i,  2,  3)  is  what  is  called  a  heavenly  blue,  and  that,  too, 
sometimes  shades  off  into  pink  just  as  our  forget-me-nots  have  a  trick  of  doing. 
The  odour  is  extremely  sweet  and  "  suave"  (Savigny).  The  white  lotus  opens  in 
the  afternoon  or  evening  and  closes  by  mid-day,  whereas  the  blue  nymphaea  opens 
in  the  morning  and  closes  at  night.  The  Moon  has  been  styled,  "  the  lover  of  the 
lotus,"  i.e.,  the  night-blooming  one,  on  this  account. 

The  Red  Lotus. 

There  is  another  Nymphaea,  the  Rubra,  the  red  lotus  of  India  (Fig.  18), 
confined  to  British  India  and  Bengal,  which  has  the  same  characteristics,  the  only 
difference  being  that  the  stigma  is  sixteen-  instead  of  eight-rayed.  It  is  of  a  brilliant 
ruby  colour  throughout,  and  is  the  lotus  of  the  Hindu  padma  prayer,  "as  the  full 
moon  with  its  mild  light  opens  the  buds  of  the  water  lily."  The  blue  and  white 
forms  (Cunningham)  remain  more  or  less  above  water  for  a  period  of  four  days. 
On  the  first  of  these  the  flower  appears  as  a  bud  just  rising  above  the  surface :  on 
the  second  it  is  half  open  and  quite  clear  of  the  water  :  on  the  third  it  is  fully  open 
and  still  more  elevated  :  on  the  fourth  it  remains  fully  expanded,  but  rests  on  the 
surface,  and  on  the  following  day  it  is  quite  submerged.  The  mature  flowers 
remain  tightly  closed  during  the  day,  and  are  wide  open  all  night,  until  about 
ten  o'clock  next  morning,  when  they  are  completely  shut  until  late  in  the  evening. 
The  N.  Rubra  flowers  keep  their  petals  open  above  the  water  for  five  days,  and 
closed  at  night,  then  sink  under  water  without  shedding  them. 

•!  The  Japanese  Nelumbiuni. 

Now  the  sacred  lotus  ot  Japan,  which  has  been  erroneously  called  also  the 
Egyptian  lotus,  is  different  in  many  respects  (Fig.  8).  The  Nelumbium  speciosum 
formerly  grew  in  Egypt,  according  to  Herodotus,  though  some  modern  writers 
dispute  this.  Delile  however  supports  his  statement  that  it  was  so.  Called  by  the 
Ancients  the  "  Bean  of  Egypt,"  it  is  best  known  by  its  peculiar  obconical  receptacle, 
which  has  been  likened  to  the  rose  of  a  watering  can,  or  a  pepper  box,  which  remains 
erect  out  of  the  water.     The  leaf  stalks  spring  from  the  root,  having  large  peltate 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt.  3 

leaves  centrally  fixed,  and  the  long  flower  stalk  rising  several  feet  out  of  the  water 
bearing  a  large,  solitary,  fragrant  flower  of  pure  white,  or  bright  rose  colour.  *  Some 
are  white  with  rose  tipped  petals.     The  bud  has  a  series  of  overlapping  sepals  like 


7.  Nymphaea  lotus. 
Outline  of  type  specimen  in  Smith's  Herbarium,  Linnaean  Society.     4/5  size. 


scales,  not  of  uniform  size :  and  does  not  therefore  show  the  characteristic  three 
sepaled  appearance  of  the  lotus.  The  calyx  leaves  drop  away  and  disappear  as  the 
flower  opens,  leaving  enormous  white  or  pink  corollas  like  single  peonies,  shining 

A  2 


4  The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 

out  among  a  dense  mass  of  large  round  leaves.  The  dried  stalks  of  the  leaves  of 
the  Nelumbo  were  used  to  make  wicks  for  the  lamps  in  the  Chinese  and  Japanese 
temples, — possibly  also  in  Egypt. 


8.  NELUMBWM  SPECIOSUM,  SacRKD  LilY  OF  JAPAN. 
Red  flower.     1/3  size. 


The  Lotus  Seeds. 


The  seeds  of  the  Nelumbium  are  about  the  size  of  small  acorns,  pleasant  to  the 
taste  and  used  for  food,  but  not  to  the  same  extent  as  the  seeds  of  the  Nymphaea, 
which  are  still  used  in  Egypt  and  West  Africa.  The  loaves  made  from  the  seeds 
and  roots  in  Egypt  were  termed  lily  loaves,  and  appeared  on  the  tables  of  the 


The   Watet  Lilies  oj  Ancient  Egypt.  5 

Egyptian  kings  of  the  XlXth  dynasty.  They  are  very  nutritious  and  contain 
starch,  proteid,  and  oil :  the  tubers  are  almost  solid  starch,  and  are  eaten  boiled  or 
roast,  like  potatoes.  Sonnini  {Travels  in  E,,  1777)  says,  in  his  day  they  were  sold 
ready  dressed  a*id  at  a  very  low  price  in  the  streets  of  Rosetta,  where  the  lower 
class  of  people  ate  them  in  large  quantities.  Only  the  seeds  of  the  lotus  and  blue 
lily  are  said  to  be  so  used  in  Egypt.  They  are  prepared  by  the  fruit  being  laid  in 
heaps  until  the  soft  parts  decay,  the  seeds  and  kernels  are  then  easily  separated, 
washed  clean,  dried  and  stowed  away  to  be  ground  in  hand  mills. 


9.  Three  Papyrus  Hbads  Arising  from  a  Lotus.    (Wilk.  611.) 


The  use  of  the  seeds  in  making  bread,  and  the  mode  of  sowing  them  by 
enclosing  in  a  ball  of  clay  and  throwing  it  into  the  water  may  probably  explain  the 
text,  "  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters,  for  thou  shall  find  it  after  many  days." 
The  lotus  seeds  come  up  annually :  the  Nelumbo  takes  from  five  to  seven  years 
sometimes  to  germinate  (Sir  David  Prain).  The  fable  of  the  nymph  Lotis  who  was 
transformed  into  a  tree  bearing  her  name  is  in  no  way  connected  with  water  lilies. 
This  lotis  or  lotos  tree  (Zizyphus  lotus)  is  a  moderate  sized,  thorny  tree  with  reddish 
fruit  containing  a  sweet  nut,  the  jujube  tree,  from  which  a  "  divine  nectareous  juice" 
was  made.  Homer  tells  us  that  when  Ulysses  sent  his  men  to  see  what  the 
"  melancholy,  mild-eyed  lotus  eaters  "  were  like, 

A   3 


6  The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 

"  What  man  of  themsoever  of  that  sweet  thing  did  eat 
Had  no  will  to  bear  back  tidings,  or  to  get  him  back  again  ; 
But  to  bide  with  the  lotus  eaters  for  ever  was  he  fain, 
And  to  eat  the  lotus  for  ever,  and  forget  his  returning  day." 

(W.  Morris'  translation.; 

The  Artistic  Adaptations. 

The  Nymphaea  lotus  is  the  one  flower  of  all  others  which  probably  gave  birth 
to  Art  as  we  find  it  exemplified  in  some  of  the  most  ancient  monuments.  A  study 
of  it  will  give  the  key  to  the  adaptation  of  the  beauty  of  plant  form  to  all  kinds  of 
decorative  work  up  to  the  present  day. 


10.  Lotus  (left)  and  Papyrus  (right)  knotted  around  the  Sign  of  Union, 

symbolizing  the  union  of  north  and  .south  eoypt. 

From  the  Throne  of  Khofra,  the  earliest  example. 

But  I  ought  to  say  a  word  about  another  plant  which  is  closely  associated  with 
the  lotus  in  Egyptian  Art,  that  is  the  papyrus,  which  entered  largely  into  the 
decorations  of  the  ancient  Egyptians.  The  large  fan  of  the  papyrus  head  is  here 
grouped  with  the  lotus  in  Fig.  9.  The  Cyperus  papyrus  grew  in  great  abundance 
in  former  days  in  Egypt  and,  as  a  Government  monopoly,  was  a  source  of  consider- 
able revenue.  Its  use  for  making  paper  can  be  dated  back  to  the  Ilird  dynasty. 
It  ceased  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  about  A.D.  700.  Besides  being  copied  for 
ornament,  it  was  sometimes  used  to  deck  the  statues  of  the  gods,  as  well  as  for  food. 

The  very  name  of  water  nymph  seems  to  denote  a  mystic  origin,  and  we 
shall  find  how  closely  the  lotus  in  its  various  forms  has  been  associated  with  sacred 
symbols  and  conceptions  of  purity  and  beauty,  from  the  days  when  it  was  adopted 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt.  7 

by  the  ancient  Egyptians  many  thousand  years  ago.  The  plant  remains  the  same 
as  then  :    the  beauty  it  has  given  birth  to  survives  also. 

Although  the  Nelumbo  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  Egyptian  hly,  we  find  no 
evidence  of  its  having  been  employed  in  the  decorative  work  of  that  country,  except 
on  very  rare  occasions,  at  any  period  of  its  history,  as  it  was  less  adapted  for 
artistic  work  than  the  white  and  blue  Nymphaeas  were. 

It  has  struck  me  as  a  curious  fact  that  the  more  beautiful  of  these  plants 
should  have  found  no  permanent  place  in  the  monumental  records  of  Egypt ;  and 


II.  The  Upper  a.nd  Lower  Nile  hoi.di.ng  the  Papyrus  ano  Lotus  Stems, 
TWISTED  AS  IN  FiG.   lo.     Statue  of  Rameses  II,  Luqsor. 


the  only  explanation  I  can  offer  is  that  the  inherent  beauty  and  grace  of  the  outlines 
of  the  Nymphaea  have,  by  their  very  simplicity,  established  a  certain  principle  or 
type  where  the  more  complex  structure  of  the  handsome  Nelumbo  has  failed. 

How  far  the  lotus  was  an  object  of  worship  seems  doubtful,  but  from  an  early 
period  we  find  it  clo.sely  associated  with  Egyptian  gods  and  kings.     There  seems  to 

A  4 


8 


The   Water  Lilies  oj  Ancient  Egypt. 


be  no  trace  of  using  the  lotus  at  Hierakonpolis  or  in  the  Royal  Tombs  of  Abydos. 
Apparently,  the  earliest  dated  example  is  in  the  group  on  the  sides  of  the  throne  of 
Khafra  in  the  IVth  dynasty.  To  symbolise  the  union  of  all  Egypt,  the  lotus  plant 
of  the  South  and  the  papyrus  of  the  North  were  intertwined  round  the  hieroglyph  of 
union  (Fig.  lo).  This  group  was  expanded  in  the  Xllth  dynasty  by  adding  the 
figures  of  the  Upper  and  Lower  Nile,  Hapi  in  two  aspects,  as  holding  the  respective 
plants  (Fig.  ii),  and  this  group  was  continued  as  a  standard  decoration  for  royal 
thrones  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  and  onwards.  The  Nile-god  in  his  two  forms  is 
likewise  shown  in  the  large  group  with  altars  covered  with  fish  and  plants  found  at 
Tanis,  commonly  called  the  fish  offerers.  Later  figures  show  a  single  statue  of 
Hapi  with  an  altar  before  him,  covered  with  lotus  and  wild  ducks,  as  under 
Tehutmes  \\\,  and  the  well-known  figure  in  the  British  Museum,  dedicated  by 
Sheshenq. 


12.  IIoKus  Seated  on  the 

Blue  Lotus. 

Uronze.     Cairo. 


13.  HoRUS  Seated  on    iuk 
White  Lotus,  surrounded 
BY  THE  Blue  Lotus. 
Bronze.     Cairo. 


The  inscriptions  call  him  "  Hapi,  father  of  the  gods,  lord  of  sustenance,  who 
maketh  food  to  be,  and  covereth  the  two  lands  of  Egypt  with  his  products :  who 
giveth  life,  banisheth  want,  and  filleth  the  granaries  to  overflowing."  In  the  hymn 
chanted  at  the  great  Nile  festival,  we  find  in  the  12th  verse:  "When  thou  art  risen 
ill  the  city  of  the  Prince — then  is  the  rich  man  filled — the  small  man  (the  poor) 
disdaineth  the  lotus — all  is  .solid  and  of  good  quality — all  herbage  is  for  his  children. 
Doth  he  forget  to  give  food,  prosperity  forsaketh  the  dwellings — the  earth  falleth 
into  wasting  sickness."  This  serves  to  indicate  that  while  the  lotus  afforded 
ordinary  food  for  the  poor,  they  were  very  willing  to  have  some  of  a  better  sort. 


The    Water  Lilies  of  Ajicient  Egypt. 


The  Lotus  in  Religion. 


The  lotus  stands  alone  as  the  plant  to  which  was  assigned  by  the  ancient 
Egyptians  the  ibystic  habitation  of  the  spirits  of  the  blest,  and  as  a  symbol  of  life 
and  immortality  as  well  as  of  resurrection.  Hence  we  find  bronze  figures  of  Horus 
on  the  lotus  (Figs.  12,  13),  and,  among  the  paintings,  one  representing  Horus  rising 
from  a  lotus  flower.  This  drawing  is  intended  to  indicate  the  NCi,  that  watery 
abyss  from  which  the  lotus  sprang  on  the  morning  of 
creation,  and  whereon  he  is  still  supposed  to  bloom. 
According  to  Maspero,  in  the  beginning  Ra  was  the 
sun  whose  fires  appeared  to  be  lighted  every  morning 
in  the  East,  and  to  be  extinguished  at  evening  in 
the  West.  But  how  could  the  sun  have  e-xisted  in 
the  Nfl  {i.e.,  the  waters  beneath  the  primordial  oceanj 
without  either  drying  up  the  waters  or  being  extin- 
guished by  them  ?  The  identification  of  Ra  with 
Horus  cleared  up  this  difficulty.  The  god  needed 
only  to  have  his  right  eye  closed  in  order  to  prevent 
his  fires  from  coming  in  contact  with  the  water.  He 
is  said  to  have  shut  up  his  disc  within  a  lotus  bud, 
whose  petals  safely  protected  it.  The  flower  had 
opened  on  the  morning  of  the  first  day,  and  from  it  the 
god  had  sprung  suddenly  as  a  child  wearing  the  solar 
disc  upon  his  head. 

Another  of  the  gods  we  find  associated  with  the 
lotus,  one  of  the  Memphite  triad,  Nefer-Tem  or  Nefer- 
Atmu  (Fig.  14)  who  appears  with  the  lotus  flower 
upon  his  head.  As  a  god  of  the  rising  sun,  we  find  the 
deceased  after  being  transformed  into  a  lotus,  address- 
ing him  thus  :  "  I  am  the  pure  lotus  which  springeth 
up  from  the  divine  splendour  that  belongeth  to  the 
nostrils  of  Ra,"  and  again,  "  Hail,  thou  lotus,  thou 
type  of  the  god  Nefer-Tem !  I  am  one  who  knoweth 

you and  I  am  one  of  you."     The  vignette 

of  the  first  version  is  a  lotus,  and  that  of  the  second 
a  lotus  plant  with  a  flower  and  buds  growing  out 
of  a  pool  of  water  (Figs.  15,  16),  and  out  of  the 
flower  springs  a  human  head  {i.e.,  the  head  of  the 
deceased). 

The  fruit  of  the  lotus  is  an  emblem  of  Isis  or 
Abundance,  and  is  so  dedicated  by  Egypt  (Foucart). 
The  association  of  the  lotus  with  the  life-giving  sun 
is  but  another  example  of  the  sacred  character  which 
was  one  of  its  attributes.  The  lotus  as  a  .symbol 
of  life  or  resurrection,  is  shown  by  its  constant  association  (Fig.  17)  with  the 
genii  of  Amenti  {i.e.,  the  Lower  World),  the  genii  of  the  dead,  and  the  children 
of  Osiris  and  Horus.  A  representation  on  the  wall  of  the  temple  of  Dar 
el-Medeenah  at  Thebes  shows  the  four  genii  of  Amenti  standing  before  Osiris 
on  an  open  lotus  flower  {Wilkinson,  ed.  Birch,  HI,  p.  468)  and  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Hunefer  (Fig.  17)  the  lotus  is  shown  growing  out  of  a  pool  at  the  feet  of  Osiris. 


Nefer-tem,  with  Blue 
Lotus  on  the  Head. 
Bronze.     Cairo. 


lO 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


In  those  countries  where  Brahma  and  Buddha  were  worshipped,  we  find  the 
deities  often  seated  on  a  lotus  flower,  usually  the  Nelumbo  (Fig.  i8).  In  Japan  it 
was  the  emblem  of  purity,  inasmuch  as  it  was  never  disfigured  by  the  muddy  waters 
in  which  it  often  grew.  Vishnu  is  shown  as  holding  in  one  of  his  four  hands 
a  lotus  flower  as  a  type  of  creative  power ;  while  Lakshmi,  the  consort  of  Vishnu, 
was  termed  "  lotus  born  "  from  having  arisen  from  the  primordial  ocean  upon  its 
blossom.  Birdwood  tells  us  that  when  the  whole  earth  was  covered  with  water 
Vishnu  lay  asleep,  extended  on  the  serpent  Ananta  ("the  infinite")  and  while  he 


15.  Head  of  the  Deceased  in  his  I.oi  us  Transformation.     Papyrus  of  Aufonkh. 

16.  Head  of  the  Deceased  on  a  Lotus  with  Buds  and  Leaves  in  a  Pool.     Papyrus  of  Any. 

17.  Four  Sons  of  Horus  on  a  Lotus  which  rises  out  of  a  Pool  at  the  feet  ok  Osiris. 

Papyrus  of  Hunefer. 

18.  Indian  Lotus  of  Buddha.     Red  petals. 

19.  Headband  of  Princess  Nefert.     Early  IVth  dynasty. 

slept,  a  lotus  sprang  from  his  navel,  and  from  its  flower  came  Brahma.  It  seems, 
therefore,  clear  that,  if  I  may  coin  a  word,  the  odour  of  its  beauty  made  itself  felt 
before  the  natural  forms  of  the  plants  began  to  be  utilized  in  Art,  just  as  the 
"  odour  of  sanctity  "  serves  for  both  the  shadow  and  the  substance. 


The  Lotus  in  Daily  Life. 

The  Egyptians  were  very  fond  of  flowers,  and  acknowledged  Min  as  their  God 
of  Gardens,  corresponding  to  the  Greek  Pan.  The  blue  lotus  was  probably  more 
common,  the  white  one  most  cultivated  in  gardens ;  and  it  .seems  likely  that  the 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


II 


20.  Headband  with  Lotus  Flowers.     Xllth  dynasty.     (Newberry:  El-Bersheh.) 

21.  Lotus   and   Buds    put   through   the   Cone   of    Hair    on    the    Head. 

XVIIIth  dynasty.     (Prisse.) 


IX 


22.  Lotus  Leaf  Fan.     XVIIIth  dynasty.     Deir  el-Bahri. 

23.  Sunshade  of  Lotus  Pattern.     Deir  el-Bahri. 

24.  Palmetto  Development  of  Lotus.     XVIIIth  dynasty. 


Tell  Amarna. 


12 


The  Water  Lilies  oj  Ancient  Egypt. 


greater  frequency  with  which  the  blue  one  was  depicted  is  owing  to  the  fact  of  its 
being  a  day  flower,  while  the  white  one  only  opening  at  night  would  be  less 
accessible  to  the  artists  of  that  day.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  fragrant  white 
or  rose  lily  fresh  from  the  gardens  would  be  better  adapted  as  an  evening  ornament 
for  the  ladies  at  their  entertainments,  as  we  see  so  often  depicted,  where  the  guests 
had  each  a  lotus  flower  or  rose  bud  placed  in  the  hand,  and  this  was  retained 
throughout  the  feast ;  servants  also  brought  necklaces  of  flowers.  Composed 
chiefly  of  the  lotus,  a  garland  was  also  put  round  the  head  (Fig.  20),  or  a  single 
lotus  bud  or  full  blown  flower  was  so  attached  as  to  hang  over  the  forehead  (Fig.  21). 
Many  of  these  made  up  into  wreaths  and  other  devices  were  placed  in  the  room  to 


25.  White  Lotus  between  Blue  Lotuses,  in  Porphyry  Bowl  with  Spouted  Edge.     Tomb 

offerings.     Xllth  dynasty. 

26.  Lotos  Group  on  Offerings  to  the  Dead.     XVIIIth  dynasty.     Deir  el-Bahri. 

27.  Lotus  Group  on  an  Altar  offered  by  Sety  \.     Abydos. 


be  in  readiness  for  use,  and  servants  constantly  brought  fresh  flowers  from  the 
garden  to  supply  the  guests  as  their  bouquets  faded. 

So  fond  were  the  Egyptians  of  flowers,  and  so  desirous  to  grace  their  gardens  with 
profusion,  that  they  even  exacted  contributions  from  nations  which  were  tributary 
to  them.  They  carried  this  fondness  for  them  still  further  by  painting  the  water 
lilies  among  the  fancy  devices  on  their  walls,  on  their  dresses,  furniture,  chairs,  boats, 
fans  (Fig.  22),  sunshades  (Fig.  23),  or  indeed  anything  they  wished  to  ornament, 
and  they  even  composed  artificial  flowers  termed  "  Aegyptiae."  Moreover,  the  lotus 
was  constantly  associated  with  all  the  Osirian  funeral  ceremonies :  with  religious 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


13 


offerings  for  the  dead  (Figs.  25,  26),  or  placed  alone  on  an  altar  before  the  gods 
(Fig.  27),  as  well  as  presented  to  the  divinities  protecting  the  dead :  thus,  it  was  the 
symbolical  flower  of  death  and  resurrection,  as  I  have  already  mentioned.  This 
could,  however,  only  apply  to  the  Nymphaea,  as  the  Nelumbo  does  not  sink  and 
rise  again  day  by  day.  "  The  use  of  flowers  in  funeral  decorations  seems  to  have 
been  very  prominent  in  the  XlXth-XXIst  dynasties.  The  custom  was  to 
lay  wreaths  and  semicircles  of  lotus  flowers  on  the  breast  of  the  enwrapped 
corpse,  until  the  sarcophagus  was  quite  packed  with  these  floral  tributes. 
Flowers  of  the  Nymphaea  Cerulea,  on  stalks  about  a  foot  long,  were  fastened 
between  the  bands  encircling  the  mummies  of  Rameses  II  and  the  priest  Nibsoni, 
and  scattered  singly  all  over  them.  Breast  wreaths,  consisting  mostly  of  petals  and 
sepals  of  the  same  plant,  sometimes  also  with  petals  of  the  N.  Lotus,  were  found  in 
the  coffins  of  Rameses  II,  Amenhotep  I,  Ahmes  (1580  B.C.),  the  priest  Nibsoni,  the 
princess  Nesi-Khonsu,  from  the  XXth  and  XXIst  dynasties  found  at  Deir  el-Bahri 


28.  Two  Lotus  or  Papyrus  Heads  tibd. 

29.  Similar.     IVth  dynasty.     Saqqara. 
3a  Lotus  Group  on  Granite  Column.     Rameses  IL 


Tomb  of  Ka-aper.     IVth  dynasty. 

Memphis. 


(Thebes)  in  1881.  These  are  probably  the  'Egyptian  wreaths'  of  Pliny  and 
Plutarch,  the  '  lotus  garlands '  of  Athenaeus.  Most  of  these  plant  remains  date 
from  1500  to  1200  B.C.,  but  those  of  Rameses  II  were  renewed  about  iioo  B.C.,  for 
in  moving  these  sarcophagi  at  that  time  into  their  secret  resting  place  in  the 
Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings,  that  of  Rameses  II  was  accidentally  broken: 
a  new  coffin  and  new  floral  decorations  being  then  provided." — Muschler. 

As  the  ancient  Egyptian  religion  died  out,  the  Nymphaeae  have  to  a  large 
extent  ceased  to  be  cultivated  in  gardens,  just  as  in  India  and  Japan  the  Nelumbo 
has  almost  disappeared  along  with  Buddhism,  except  where  nurtured  in  old  Temple 
gardens  by  the  priests.  The.se  facts  seem  rather  to  indicate  a  definite  relation  to 
former  religious  rites  in  both  cases. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  illustrations  of  the  lotus  proper  (Figs.  1-7)  and  the 
Nelumbo  (Fig.  8),  that  the  former  is  the  only  one  which  fully  explains  its  adapta- 
tion to  decorative  art.     The  inflorescence  of  the  Nelumbo  is  never  found  in  any 


14 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


Egyptian  work  as  a  sacred  emblem,  and  the  seed  vessel  never  appears.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  you  observe  the  arrangement  of  the  petals  and  the  drooping  calyx 
leaves  of  the  blue  or  white  lily,  and  especially  the  buds  of  the  same  plants,  their 
exact  likeness  to  the  earliest  representations  known  is  evident.  The  same  applies 
to  the  rayed  stigma,  which  both  in  its  fresh  and  dried  state  gives  us  the  figure  of 
the  Egj'ptian  rosette  (Princess  Nefert)  (Fig.  19).     This  is  also  shown  in  a  section. 


31.  Blue  Glazed  Lotus  Cup.     Nubt.     University  College.     5  :  8. 

32.  Scarab  with  Scrolls  and  Lotus  ;  of  the  Marshal  of  the  City,  Ausuonkh. 

33.  Wooden  Lid  of  Toilet  Box.     University  College.     5  : 8. 

34.  Outside  of  Blue  Glazed  Bowl.     XVIIIth  dynasty.     University  College.     5  :  8. 

35.  Outside  of  Steatite  Dish.     Roman.     University  College.     5  : 8. 


Turin.      5  :  2. 


The  palmette  (Fig.  23)  is  the  ovary  stigma  combined  with  the  lotus  flower.     This 
was  used  in  Egypt  some  2,800  years  before  it  was  seen  in  Assyria. 

The  inherent  love  of  beautiful  forms  and  of  drawing  them  was,  as  Petrie  says, 
a  great  force  among  the  Egyptians,  and  made  Egypt  the  birthplace  of  the  world's 
best  ornament. 


The   Watet  Lilies  oj  Ancient  Egypt. 


The  Lotus  in  Formal  Ornament. 

In  the  very earliest  Egyptian  work  there  is  found  a  combination  of  the  spiral 
and  geometric  forms,  while  we  find  before  the  IVth  dynasty  the  lotus  represented 
on  pottery,  and  in  the  IVth  dynasty  the  group  of  two  tied  lotus  flowers,  which 
continued  till  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  (Figs.  28,  29).  At  this  remote  period  of  the 
world's  records  the  traditions  of  religion  and  of  art  were  so  carefully  handed  down 
from  one  generation  to  another,  that  according  to  the  best  authorities,  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  trace  the  gradations  from  the  crudest  to  the  more  advanced  forms. 


36,  37.  Borders  of  Lotus  Flowers.  I  XVIIIth  dynasty. 
38.  Quadruple  Lotus  Groups.     /        Prisse. 

Plato  ascribes  this  seeming  changelessness  in  the  Egyptians  to  the  fact  that  the 
forms  represented  in  the  temples  patterns  of  virtue,  which  were  appropriated  by 
the  priests,  and  that  no  artist  or  painter  was  permitted  to  depart  from  the  traditional 
and  invent  new  ones,  that  these  works  of  art  discovered  later  were  moulded  in  the 
form  of  10,000  years  before,  so  that  the  ancient  sculptures  and  paintings  underwent 
little,  if  any,  change  during  these  long  ages.  It  was  not  until  the  time  when 
conventionalism  began  to  tell,  that  decadence  took  place  as  I  shall  try  to  show 
later. 


i6 


The   Water  Lines  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


We  have  not  time  to  go  into  geometrical  decoration,  except  so  far  as  it  is 
associated  with  the  subject  of  this  paper.  The  lotus  has  been  held  to  explain  the 
concentric  rings  which  have  been  so  beautifully  drawn  on  the  scarabs  of  the 
Vlth  dynasty,  and  even  earlier  than  this.  These  spirals  are  said  to  represent 
(Fig.  32)  the  wanderings  of  the  soul,  but  as  Prof  Petrie  asks,  how  could  the  soul  go 
both  ways  at  once  ?  To  my  mind  tendrils  more  probably  gave  rise  to  this  form  of 
ornament,  and  the  endless  spirals  may  fitly  represent  eternity,  as  we  know  that  the 
ancient  Egyptians  believed  in  the  immortality  of  the  Soul.  We  find  in  this 
example  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  the  flower  of  the  lotus  introduced  with  excellent 
effect  (Fig.  32),  and  later  in  a  more  geometrical  combined  form  as  in  this  (Figs.  36,  37). 
This  combination  was  employed  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  but  no  examples  have 
been  found  of  circular  decoration  before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  Among  them  the 
most  beautiful  type  was  with  contiguous  circles,  each  containing  four  lotus  flowers 
(Fig.  38).     The  rich  effect  of  the  insertion  of  these  is  very  marked.     The  lotus 


39.  Clump  of  Papyrus.     Tomb  of  Debuhen.     IVth  dynasty.     (L.D.  ii,  35.) 

40.  Matting  of  Lotus  Pattern.     Tomb  of  Rashepses.     Vth  dynasty.     (L.D.  11,64.) 

occasionally  is  figured  with  six  sepals,  as  Figs.  34,  35  ;  but  the  circle  alone  is  never 
found  divided  into  six  parts,  as  in  Assyria  and  Syria,  but  always  four  or  a  multiple 
of  that  number.     Probably  they  never  used  compasses  at  that  period. 

The  earliest  known  delineation  of  lotus  alone  is  on  some  prehistoric  pottery 
found  at  Koptos.  It  is  crude  but  quite  correctly  drawn  and  easily  recognisable  as 
the  sepals  of  the  blue  lotus.  On  the  head-band  of  the  statue  of  Princess  Nefert, 
which  is  no  doubt  familiar  to  you,  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  we  have  the  blue  lotus 
shown,  combined  with  the  rosette  derived  from  the  lotus  as  I  have  already 
explained  (Fig.  19).  As  the  lotus  flower  was  emblematic  of  eternal  youth,  we  find 
it  commonly  on  charms  of  all  kinds — in  fact  it  is  seen  on  almost  every  article  the 
Egyptians  possessed.  The  cups  were  usually  copied  from  the  lotus  flower,  as 
Fig.  31.  An  ornamental  box  with  lid  in  the  British  Museum  from  Thebes  about 
1050  B.C.  gives  a  good  idea  of  lotus  wood  carving,  and  the  lotus  lid  of  a  box  is 
shown  here  (Fig.  33).  Some  of  the  jewellery,  headdresses  and  ornaments  are 
beautiful  examples  of  fine  lotus  work  of  that  period.     Later  on,  the  artistic  skill 


Tlie   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


J7 


assumed  a  more  mechanical  style  and  evinced  less  individuality.  That  devotion  of 
the  workman  to  the  work  he  loved,  and  which  he  represented  so  faithfully,  a  marked 
feature  of  the  Japanese  also,  decayed  by  degrees,  as  other  nations  implanted  new 
ideas  and  new  methods  upon  it.  Some  writers  have  thought  the  rosette  pattern 
was  derived  from  the  daisy,  as  in  some  examples,  especially  on  embroidery  work, 
the  yellow  centre  is  shown.  This  is  quite  possible,  though  the  lotus  rosette  is 
almost  universal. 


41,  42.  White  Lotus  Capitals.     Vlth  dynasty.     Zowyet  el-Meyetin. 

43.  Lotus  Capital  of  Amenhotep  IL     Thebes. 

44,  45.     Lotus  Capitals  of  Amenhotep  IIL     Thebes.     All  Prisse. 


As  a  border  pattern  the  lotus  was  not  used  before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  where 
we  find  it  delineated  in  a  somewhat  formal  manner  (Figs.  36,  37).  But  long  before 
this,  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  the  whole  plant  of  the  lotus  was  employed  as  a  decora- 
tion both  on  architecture  and  sculpture,  and  later  it  was  of  a  more  free  character, 
tending  to  become  less  natural  and  more  conventional.  And  next  we  find  it 
becoming  in  the  Ptolemaic  period  more  stiff  still,  being  represented  by  parallel  lines 
both  for  the  lotus  and  papyrus.     Then  more  complicated  forms  came  in,  leading  to 

B 


i8 


The  Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


the  Greek  anthemion  (derived  from  the  Egyptian),  and  other  complicated  evolutions. 
It  is  quite  possible  the  Greek  ])almetto  arose  from  the  lotus  also,  as  well  as  the  fleur- 
de-lys.  Many  other  flowers  were  thus  introduced  which  do  not  concern  us  here. 
"  Now  we  come  to  the  adaptation  of  the  lotus  plant  to  architecture,  and  we  are 
at  once  struck  by  the  fact  that  Egypt  affords  by  far  the  most  ancient  examples :  it 
was  in  fact  its  birthplace.     The  lotus  motive  is  characteristic  of  the  finest  examples 


46.  White  Lotus  Capital  with  Blue  Lotus  Flowers  above. 

47.  Blue  Lotus  Capital.     Both  Vili  dynasty  (?).     Memphis. 


of  Egyptian  architecture,  and  the  variety  is  great.  The  conventional  forms  of  the 
lotus  which  have  been  multiplied  almost  indefinitely  in  every  direction,  invariably 
convey  the  idea  of  the  flower  or  the  plant,  and  to  this  day  in  a  large  proportion  of 
the  best  designs  one  can  trace  this  influence. 

The  earliest  delineation  of  the  lotus  flower  is  stated  by  Miss  Murray  to  be  on 
the  tomb  of  the  Sheikh  el-Beled  at  Sakkarah  (Fig.  28),  but  it  looks  to  me  more  like 
papyrus.     It  often  is  carved  on  mastabas,  as  Fig.  29.     There  is  a  typical  lotus 


The    Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


19 


capital  in  wood  of  the  Vlth  dynasty  described  by  Prisse  d'Avennes  (Figs.  41,  42), 
which  clearly  is  taken  from  the  white  lotus  to  which  the  buds  and  flower  exactly 
correspond.  Prof.  Petrie  gives  a  photograph  of  the  white  lotus  capital  of  the 
Vth  dynasty  fouftd  at  Memphis  (Fig.  46).  Of  the  same  age  is  also  the  blue  lotus 
capital  (Fig.  47).  At  the  Temple  of  Karnak  we  find  some  beautiful  examples  of 
the  adaptation  of  the  lotus  flower  to  the  capitals  of  some  of  the  enormous  granite 
columns  of  Tehutmes  III  (Fig.  48).  The  caly,x  is  there  without  the  flower,  and  is 
only  one  step  removed  from  the  Greek  Ionic  capital,  and  about  1400  B.C.  this 
modification  was  actually  used  in  Egypt,  some  8cK)  years  before  it  appeared  in 
Greece. 


4S.  Granite  Pillars  with  Papyrus  and  Lotus. 
Tehutmes  III.     Karnak. 


A  good  illustration  of  the  closed  bud  and  open  flower  designs  are  given  by 
Pris.se — clearly  the  lotus  (Figs.  43,  44,  45).  One  mark  of  distinction  between  that 
and  the  papyrus  column  is  that,  in  the  latter,  root  leaves  are  usually  depicted  at  the 
foot  of  the  papyrus  design,  never  on  that  of  the  lotus — showing  how  carefully 
Nature  was  followed  at  that  early  period.  In  some  of  the  lotus  columns,  as  at 
Philae,  no  two  are  quite  alike.  I  need  not  multiply  instances  of  this  kind  ;  they 
must  be  quite  familiar  to  everyone,  for  some  fine  examples  are  to  be  seen  in  our 
British  Museum  ;  though  to  be  fully  appreciated  they  must  be  seen  in  situ,  with  the 
soft  Egyptian  moonlight  or  sunrise  playing  upon  them  and  casting  over  them 
a  glamour  which  is  unique. 

B  2 


20 


The   Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt. 


I  have  endeavoured,  in  taking  the  lotus  of  Egypt  as  my  text,  to  confine  my 
remarl<s  to  that  more  especially  as  the  source  of  beautiful  design,  from  which  lovely 
flower  forms  were  instilled  into  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians  giving  them  their  ideas 
of  beauty  thousands  of  years  ago  :  the  beginning  from  which  most  artistic  forms  have 
since  been  developed.  The  Egyptians  long  ago  discovered  that  you  cannot  with 
impunity  encroach  upon  the  simple  law  of  natural  beauty,  as  exemplified  in  the 
curves  of  plant  life,  any  more  than  you  can  infringe  other  natural  laws  without 
a  corresponding  injury.  In  fact,  the  more  nearly  we  can  approach  the  harmony 
which  prevails  in  the  complete  work  of  Nature,  the  more  perfect  will  the  copy 
appear,  and  so  much  the  more  likely  is  it  to  become  a  "joy  for  ever." 

W.  D.  Spanton. 


49.  Lotus  Capital.     Tomb  of  Ymery.    Vtli  dynasty.     (L.D.  ii,  52.) 

50.  Lotus  Capital.    Jewellery  ok  Senusert  II. 

51.  Lotus  Seed  Vessel  ;  Ovary,  Side  and  Top  View. 

The  last  is  from  a  bracelet  of  the  tomb  of  Zer  ;  it  has  twenty-one  divisions,  suggesting  the 
sixteen  divisions  of  N.  nthra  of  India.     No  Egyptian  lotus  has  more  than  eight  divisions. 


(      21 


AN  ARCHITECTURAL  SKETCH  AT  SHEIKH  SAID. 

In  Prof.  Petrie's  Tell  el-Amarna,  p.  19,  there  is  notice  of  a  plan  seen  by  Prof.  Sayce 
on  the  walls  of  a  quarry  at  Sheikh  Said,  and  a  rough  reproduction  of  the  same  on 
PI.  XXXVII.  The  supposition,  however,  that  the  sketch  had  been  destroyed 
by  1885  is  incorrect,  though  that  may  well  be  the  case  by  now.  In  1903  I  saw  and 
traced  it,  and  now  reproduce  it  here.  The  original  was  drawn  without  much  care 
in  red  ink,  on  the  very  rough  surface  of  the  north  side  of  a  pillar  of  rock,  at  the 
north  end  of  a  subterranean  quarry  just  downstream  from  the  tomb  of  the  Sheikh 
Said  {Arch.  Report,  E.E.F.,  1892-3,  p.  10  ;  Tombs  of  Sheikh  Said,  p.  6).  I  was  not 
able  to  assign  any  date  to  the  quarry  or  to  the  neighbouring  tombs,  though  the 
latter  gave  the  impression  of  being  late  in  date,  and  to  my  knowledge  there  are 
burials  of  the  Roman  Period  just  above  them.  On  the  ceiling  of  the  quarry, 
divisions  (for  piece-work  ?)  have  been  marked,  also  in  red  ink.  The  plan  was 
therefore  probably  made  by  the  overseer  or  scribe  of  the  quarrymen  ;  for,  from  the 
simplicity  of  the  design,  and  its  impracticability  in  some  details,  it  does  not  seem 
to  be  the  work  of  an  architect,  but  either  the  idly  drawn  picture  of  an  imaginary 
building,  or  the  memory  of  an  actual  temple  or  its  ruins.  A  few  of  the  lines  are 
uncertain,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  plate :  and  some  faint  and  irregular  lines  have 
also  been  omitted  as  erroneous.  In  my  tracing  I  have  marked  the  entrance 
"river-end."  It  is  therefore  placed  horizontally  on  the  wall.  It  is  sixty-two  inches 
long  and  twenty-one  inches  high. 

It  is  at  once  plain  that  the  plan  is  not  that  of  a  projected  quarry,  but  of 
a  constructional  building.  The  quarry  is  actually  on  the  river  bank,  and  its  stone 
could  therefore  be  transported  easily  to  a  distance.  Still  the  most  likely  places  for 
the  use  of  the  stone  are  Akhenaten's  capital  close  by,  if  the  quarry  is  as  early  as 
that ;  or  Eshmunen  (Hermopolis  Magna)  on  the  opposite  bank  if  it  is  later. 
The  town  of  Antinoe  would  probably  derive  its  materials  from  the  quarries  of 
El-Bersheh. 

The  plan  is  evidently  a  rough  one,  and  may  have  been  meant  by  the  overseer 
to  give  his  men  an  idea  of  the  arrangement  of  the  rooms  in  the  building  for  which 
the  stone  was  destined,  the  doorways  being  for  the  most  part  omitted.  The  most 
puzzling  feature  is  the  series  of  party-walls,  which  are  drawn  consistently  neither 
through  the  columns  (screen-walls),  nor  midway  between  them,  but  just  behind. 
It  may  be  noticed  in  my  El-Amarna,  VI,  PI.  XI,  that  the  provision  of  a  cornice 
to  the  dwarf-wall  does  throw  the  ground  plan  nearer  the  back  than  the  centre  of 
the  columns.  Screen  walls  are  never  used,  I  think,  to  divide  up  a  large  hall  into 
bays ;  and  in  any  case  the  similarly  drawn  line  which  divides  this  columnar  hall  or 
halls  from  the  sanctuary  (?),  must  represent  a  wall  the  full  height  of  the  building. 
But  the  result  is  that  we  have  not  only  columns  but  also  pilasters  engaged  in  the 
party  walls,  and  appearing  on  both  sides  of  them.  Though  I  have  thus  shown 
them  in  my  interpretation  of  the  plan,  I  do  not  believe  they  were  so  found  in 
a  real  building,  but  that  the  arrangement  is  due  to  careless  draughting.     If  these 

B  3 


Ancient  Sketch-plan  OF  Bi'iLinxG.    Tell  Amama.     1:7. 


-M- 


rr^ 


-• — •- 


•    t 

-• — •- 


I'l.AN    REDRAWN    IN    MODKKN    STYLE. 


B  4 


24  An  Architectural  Sketch  at  Sheikh  Said. 

walls  are  not  screen  walls,  they  must  be  dividing  walls  of  full  height,  bisecting 
intercolumniation  (of  double  length  ?).  The  pilasters  on  the  side  walls  which 
continue  the  transverse  rows  of  columns  arc  less  needed  there  than  on  the  party- 
walls  where  the  engaged  (?)  columns  are  shown  ;  for  we  must  postulate  architraves 
which  connect  the  columns  longitudinally,  while  transverse  architraves  could  be 
dispensed  with. 

If  the  plan  be  taken  seriously,  its  interpretation  is  as  follows:  The  front  of  the 
building  is  formed  by  a  portico,  two  columns  deep,  and  six  in  frontage,  the 
exterior  row  being  linked  up  by  a  screen-wall  (as  at  Dendereh  and  Hermopolis), 
except  in  the  middle,  where  one  enters  between  heavy  gate  posts.  Behind  the 
portico  the  building  consists  of  two  parts,  as  the  draughtsman's  lines  clearly  show. 
The  length  of  the  fore  part  is  divided  into  four  equal  rooms  with  four  columns  in 
each  on  either  hand  ;  or,  if  the  dividing  walls  are  only  screens,  it  forms  a  colonnaded 
hall  of  forty-eight  columns,  arranged  in  twelve  rows  of  four  each.  The  front  wall 
towards  the  portico  is  formed  by  six  columns,  of  which  the  centre  four  are  engaged 
in  a  screening  wall  for  part  of  their  height,  while  the  two  outside  ones  abut  on,  or  are 
engaged  in,  the  side  walls  also.  The  longitudinal  architraves  carried  by  the 
columns  of  the  three  halls  (or  hall)  are  indicated,  but  no  transverse  beams,  though 
the  presence  of  pilasters  on  the  side  walls  imply  their  existence  (cf.  El-Amama, 
IV,  PI.  XXXVIII ;  V,  Pis.  VII,  VIII). 

At  the  back  of  these  columned  halls  are  three  rooms  ;  a  middle  one,  which 
must  be  the  shrine,  and  two  side  ones,  regarding  which  it  is  open  to  speculation 
whether  they  are  entered  from  the  corridor  or  the  shrine.  As  the  shrine  appears 
to  be  closed  in  the  rear  (though  the  lines  do  not  quite  meet),  it  is  probable  that  the 
rear  division  of  the  temple  is  entered  through  the  corridor  and  these  side 
chambers. 

In  the  rear  half  of  the  temple  there  is  much  the  same  arrangement  as  in  the 
fore  half,  except  that  -the  whole  breadth  is  taken  up  by  the  columnar  halls,  and 
that  no  pilasters  are  shown.  The  division  into  three  halls  raises  just  the  same 
difficulty  as  in  the  main  building ;  and  the  way  in  which  the  whole  building  is 
constructed,  on  a  few  lines  which  run  across  it  from  side  to  side  and  end  to  end,  is 
opposed  to  any  connection  with  actual  architecture.  It  results  here  in  an  unequal 
intercolumniation  (corrected  in  my  interpreted  plan).  This  rear  part  of  the  temple 
can  hardly  be  roofed  in  the  middle,  the  span  being  too  great. 

If  we  study  the  buildings  in  Akhetaten,  the  great  temple  (taking  El-Amama, 
I,  Pis.  XI,  XII,  as  a  guide)  affords  certain  rough  analogies,  so  that  it  is  not 
impossible  to  think  of  our  plan  being  a  rough  reproduction  of  one  of  the  other 
temples  which  we  know  to  have  existed  in  the  capital.  The  screen  wall  and  the 
pilasters  are  peculiar  and  attractive  features  of  several  of  the  tombs,  and  the  double 
colonnade  in  front  marks  a  speciality  of  the  temple.  Other  similarities  are  the 
series  of  side  chapels  or  magazines,  the  halls  or  courts  one  behind  the  other  and 
extending  across  the  entire  building,  the  temple  divided  clearly  into  two  parts,  and 
the  absence  of  the  usual  deep  shrine  along  the  axis  of  the  building.  Unfortunately, 
we  have  no  more  means  of  checking  the  tomb-plans  by  the  actual  ruins  than  in 
the  present  case.  The  sketch  here,  though  not  impossibly  the  plan  of  a  real 
building,  and  a  sacred  one,  is  very  unlike  the  known  Egyptian  temple,  late  or 
early ;  but  then  the  architecture  of  Akhetaten  seems  to  have  been  as  unorthodox 
as  its  doctrines. 

Unfortunately,  too,  we  have  to  regret  our  ignorance  of  the  buildings  that 
Antinoe  and  Hermopolis  contained.     What  we  know  of  them  from  Denon's  Voyage 


An  Architectural  Sketch  at  Sheikh  Said.  25 

dans  la  basse et  la  haute  Egypte,  PI.  33,  Annales  du  Service,  VIII,  p.  21 1,  and  else- 
where, does  not  encourage  us  to  think  that  this  sketch  reflects  the  plan  of  a  lost 
temple  there.  A  greater  value  than  I  can  claim  for  it  now  may  yet  attach  itself 
to  this  sketch-pFan,  but  at  the  least  it  has  considerable  human  interest  as  showing 
in  its  originator  a  knowledge  of  architectural  design  and  a  measure  of  originality 
in  conception. 

N.  DE  GaRIS  Davies. 


(     26     ) 


EGYPT    AND    MESOPOTAMIA. 

The  whole  question  of  the  relations  of  early  civilisation  in  Egypt  has  been 
re-opened  by  the  publication  of  a  new  ivory-carving,  which  is  the  most  important 
known  for  its  historical  purport.  This  is  a  knife  handle,  stated  to  have  been  found 
at  Gebel  el-'Arak  opposite  Nag  Hamadi,  purchased  by  M.  Benddite  for  the 
Louvre  Museum  in  1914,  and  now  published  by  the  learned  Curator  in  the 
Monuments  et  Mcmoires  of  the  Academic  des  Inscriptions  (Tom.  XXII,  fasc.  i). 
As  that  publication  is  not  much  seen  in  England,  the  author  has  kindly  permitted 
the  most  important  parts  to  appear  in  Ancient  Egypt. 

M.  Ben^dite  first  describes  the  decorated  handles  of  flint  knives  already 
known.  These  are  :  (i)  an  ivory  handle  from  near  Edfu,  now  at  Brooklyn,  with  nine 
rows  of  animals  on  one  side  and  ten  on  the  other,  altogether  about  yoo  figures ; 
(2)  the  ivory  handle  from  near  Sohag  (published  in  Naqadali,  LXXVII),  with 
six  rows  of  animals  on  each  side,  now  at  Oxford  ;  (3)  the  handle  covered  with  gold 
foil  bearing  figures  punched  on  it,  found  at  Gebel  Tarif,  now  in  Cairo ;  (4)  the 
small  handle  with  two  serpents  and  rosettes  on  one  side  and  a  lion,  lioness,  and 
hedgehog  on  the  other,  at  University  College,  the  serpents  on  which  are  here 
figured.  Beside  these,  there  are  some  flint  knives  which,  by  the  marks  on  them, 
have  evidently  had  similar  handles.  All  these  flint  knives  are  to  the  same  style ; 
they  have  been  ground  on  the  faces,  and  then  one  face  flaked  over  with  the  most 
regular  parallel  ripple  flaking.  This  is  the  finest  style  of  flint  work,  belonging  to 
about  S.D.  60.  The  butts  of  the  knives  are  not  of  the  usual  broad  curve,  but  they 
are  chipped  down  to  a  narrow  wedge  form,  to  fit  into  the  ivory  handles.  On  the 
new  knife  it  is  clear  that  the  ivory  was  too  narrow  to  agree  with  the  full  width 
of  the  blade,  and  the  edge  has  been  trimmed  back  for  nearly  half  the  length,  so  as 
to  be  about  0*2  inch  narrower  at  the  junction  with  the  handle.  This  shows  that  the 
flint  work  was  completed  regardless  of  the  handle,  and  adjusted  later  :  such  an 
adaptation  might  be  a  sign  that  the  flint  was  already  old  when  fitted  to  the  handle. 
On  the  other  hand,  all  four  knives  are  of  exactly  the  same  work  and  period,  and  it 
is  unlikely  that  several  such  should  be  the  only  flints  fitted  with  handles  if  the 
work  was  not  all  of  one  period.  The  new  knife  is  64  inches  long,  and  the  handle 
3'8  inches,  or  I0"2  inches  over  all  in  length.  The  flint  is  2"2  inches  wide;  the  ivory 
handle  17  inch  wide.  The  photographs  of  the  handles  here  given  are  double  the 
actual  size.  On  all  the  three  large  ivory  handles  there  is  in  the  middle  of  one  side 
an  ovoid  boss — or  a  socket  for  such  on  the  Oxford  handle ;  this  boss  is  pierced  with 
a  hole,  and  is  evidently  for  a  coid  to  sling  from  the  girdle. 

On-  one  side  of  the  handle  (Fig.  i)  there  are  two  rows  of  fighting  men ;  five 
with  the  hair  cut  short,  and  well  armed,  are  subduing  four  men  with  long  hair,  and 
unarmed.  They  are  all  unclothed,  only  wearing  the  girdle  and  sheath  so  well 
known  on  prehistoric  statuettes.  In  this  respect  they  are  earlier  than  the  men 
of  the  hunting  palette,  who  all  wear  waist  cloths  made  with  pleats.  The  arms  used 
by  the  crop-heads  are  three  kherps  (thus  shown  to  be  a  primitive  weapon),  one 
pear-shaped  mace-head,  and  one  flint  knife  held  by  the  middle. 

Below  these  are  two  ships  of  one  kind  and  three  of  another  kind,  with  four 
dead  bodies  between  them,  probably  drowned.     Two  heads  have  disappeared  in  a 


Egypt  and  Mesopotauiia. 


2? 


flake  of  the  ivory  ;  the  remaining  two  are  one  with  long  hair,  the  other  a  crop-head. 
Another  crop-head  man  holding  a  long  rope,  at  the  end  of  the  upper  boats,  does 


I.  Oeeei.  Ei,-Arak  Knife  Handle.    2:1. 
Combat  Scenes  on  Land  and  Waiek. 


28 


Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 


not  belong  to  this  scene,  but  connects  with  the  hunting  of  the  ibex  on  the  other 
side.  The  upper  two  boats  are  interpreted  by  M.  Ben^dite  as  having  at  the  left 
a  mast  with  a  crutch  for  the  yard,  and  the  yard  and  sail  slanting  down  from  that 
into  the  forepart  of  the  boat  (see  Fig.  3) ;  next  a  round  topped  cabin  and  an  ensign 
mast  by  it ;  near  the  stern  a  low  crutch  for  the  steering  oar ;  and  the  stern  rising 
up  with  a  clutch  at  the  top  of  it  holding  an  object  like  the  ensign  of  Letopolis. 
The  lower  three  ships  are  of  the  papyrus  boat  type  usual  on  the  Nile  in  historic 
times ;  the  cabin  and  posts  on  each  ship  differ  from  the  type  at  Hierakonpolis 
(S.D.  63)  and  later.  At  the  prow  of  each  ship  is  an  antelope  head,  which 
M.  Bcnedite  compares  to  the  gazelle  head  on  the  prow  of  the  sacred  boat  of  Seker. 
The  relation  of  this  carving  to  other  remains  will  be  noticed  further  on. 


4^ 


2.   Ul.Ai  K  Sllir.     Hievakoii|;u'.i^  Tonil>. 
-!,.   Siiir  ON  UoRY  Handlk  of  Kmkk. 


On  the  other  side  of  the  handle.  Fig.  4,  the  design  is  more  surprising.  At  the 
top  is  an  heroic  figure  in  a  long  robe,  contrasting  with  the  naked  fighters  of  the 
previous  side.  He  holds  two  enormous  massive  lions,  which  are  not  of  the  early 
Egyptian  type.  He  has  on  the  head  either  a  cap  with  a  deep  rolled  brim,  or  else  a 
disc  of  curly  hair  as  on  the  early  statues  of  Mesopotamia.  His  beard  is  large  and 
full,  so  that  in  every  respect  he  differs  from  both  of  the  types  of  fighters.  Below 
this  group  are  two  collared  hunting  hounds,  each  with  a  forepaw  raised  over  the 
central  boss.     The  spirit  and  finish  of  these  figures  is  magnificent :  they  are  the 


Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 


29 


finest  and  most  natural  of  all,  unsurpassed  by  any  later  work.     Below  these  in 
the  shadow  on  the  left  is  a  dorcas  gazelle,  on  the  right  a  beautiful  figure  of  an  ibex. 


4.  Gebei.  El-Arak  Knife  Handle. 
Hunting  Scenes. 


30  ^Sypt  <"id  Mesopotamia. 

Below  the  boss  is  a  lioness  springing  on  an  ox,  and  behind  these  an  ibex  or 
moufflon,  apparently  lassoed  by  the  hind  leg.  At  the  base  is  a  smaller  ox,  hunted 
by  a  lynx  or  serval,  held  in  leash  by  the  same  hunter  who  appears  to  have  lassoed 
the  moufflon  above.  The  head  is  lost,  but  the  figure  is  like  that  of  the  hunter 
before  the  boat  who  has  lassoed  the  smaller  ibex  ;  he  is  of  the  crop-head  type. 
Having  now  noted  the  details  we  can  take  a  view  of  the  whole. 

We  are  here  made  aware  of  a  new  school  of  high  Art.  There  are  few  ancient 
lands  that  could  rival  this  work,  perhaps  none  that  could  surpass  the  spirit  of  the 
dogs  and  the  ibex.  Yet  this  must  belong  to  an  age  before  the  1st  dynasty,  as  the 
style  of  the  flint  knife  is  of  the  best  period  of  the  second  prehistoric  Age ;  and  the 
fighters  show  an  earlier  style  than  the  hunters  of  the  slate  palettes.  This  Art  is  not 
Egyptian  ;  it  has  no  sort  of  parallel  in  any  of  the  purely  prehistoric  work  of  Egypt. 
The  general  style  of  the  fighting  groups  reminds  us  of  more  than  one  monument 
of  early  Mesopotamia.  Above  all  the  figure  of  the  hero  with  lions  is  a  purely 
Mesopotamian  or  Elamite  type,  familiar  down  to  Persian  times.  Thus  the  affinities 
are  of  the  Tigris  rather  than  of  the  Nile.  Yet,  we  must  not  assign  it  to  either 
source.  There  is  no  exact  parallel,  in  all  the  sculptures  or  cylinder-seals,  for 
these  groups.  Their  inspiration  is  from  the  Elamite  school,  but  they  were  not 
foreign  work  brought  from  there.  They  are  the  product  of  an  Oriental  people 
inspired  by  Elam  and  the  Tigris,  and  entering  Egypt  with  their  own  traditions. 

The  general  parallelism  with  the  principles  of  the  slate  palettes  should  be 
taken  into  account.  The  palette  has  animals  facing  on  either  side  of  its  central 
paint-well ;  so  the  handle  has  dogs  facing  on  either  side  of  its  central  boss.  The 
hunters  lasso  the  wild  animals  on  both  the  palettes  and  the  handle.  There  is  a 
system  of  symmetry  in  the  upper  parts  of  both,  and  procession  in  one  direction 
below.  The  palettes  seem  to  be  a  later  product  of  the  same  school  of  Art  as  the 
ivory  handle ;  inferior  to  it  in  most  cases,  but  in  the  later  palettes  about  equal  to 
the  handle,  though  in  a  rather  different  style.  The  handle,  in  short,  is  the  climax 
of  one  cycle  of  Art,  which  decayed  to  the  work  of  the  coarser  handles  and  earliest 
palettes,  and  the  finest  palettes  are  the  clima.x  of  the  next  cycle. 

The  slate  palettes  are  classified  by  M.  B^nedite  according  to  their  styles 
of  work,  in  three  periods.  The  latest  is  that  of  Narmer,  with  which  he  places  the 
bull  fragment  of  the  Louvre,  and  that  with  the  gazelles  and  palm.  Before  these  is 
a  rather  vague  class  of  the  fragment  with  seven  towns,  the  Louvre  fragment- Renan, 
and  the  dwarf  palette  of  the  British  Museum.  The  earliest  of  the  three  classes  is 
the  animal  palette  of  Hierakonpolis,  and  the  great  hunting  palette.  The  charac- 
teristics of  the  earliest  class  are  the  round  drilled  eye ;  the  plain  squared  form 
of  the  torso ;  the  knees  not  projecting,  but  with  kneecaps  outlined ;  rudimentary 
hands,  without  opposing  thumbs ;  the  squared  foot ;  the  folds  of  skin  on  the 
shoulders  of  animals ;  the  continuation  of  mane  hair  on  the  underside  of  the  lion ; 
the  comb-shaped  claws  of  lions. 

Some  further  detail  may  perhaps  be  added  to  these  classes.  The  palette 
of  Narmer  is  certainly  later  in  work  than  any  of  the  others.  The  Louvre  bull 
fragment  is  of  a  wiry  style,  which  precedes  the  best  work  in  later  Art,  and  though 
near  the  Narmer  palette,  it  is  probably  at  least  a  generation  earlier.  The  giraffes 
and  palm  palette  may  be  nearer  Narmer,  as  it  is  of  a  smooth  delicate  style ; 
M.  B^n^dite  goes  so  far  as  "  to  prognosticate  that  the  missing  pieces  of  the  upper 
part,  which  may  some  day  be  found,  bore  the  name  of  the  Scorpion  king." 

The  great  mace-heads  are  next  considered,  one  with  the  name  lost  (University 
College),  one  of  Narmer  (Oxford),  one  of  the  Scorpion  king  (Oxford).     The  style 


Egypt  and  Mesopotamia.  3' 

of  these  accords  with  that  of  the  latest  group  of  palettes,  and  therefore  the  two 
other  groups  must  be  older  than  the  Scorpion  king. 

It  is  proposed  that  the  origin  of  the  palette  form  is  from  the  early  shield, 
which  appears  fn  the  hieroglyph  of  Aha.  This  suggestion  is  unfortunate,  as  the 
palettes  have  always  a  form  tapering  to  a  rounded  end  or  point  below,  while  the 
shield  is  always  fully  square  below.  The  central  pan  in  each  palette,  which  is  so 
important  that  the  whole  design  centres  around  it,  would  be  entirely  without 
meaning  in  a  shield ;  there  is  never  any  suggestion  of  a  handle  connected  with  it. 
When  we  look  at  the  long  series  of  slate  palettes  throughout  the  prehistoric  Age, 
we  see  the  purpose  of  them  unmistakably,  by  the  hollow  worn  in  grinding,  and 
the  remains  of  ground  malachite  frequently  found  upon  them ;  beside  the  general 
a.ssociation  with  a  brown  flint  pebble  used  to  crush  the  paint,  the  pebble  often 
having  the  green  paint  also  upon  it.  The  many  instances  of  green  paint  around 
the  eyes  on  prehistoric  figures,  on  the  early  sculptures  (Sekerkhobau  and  others), 
and  on  the  early  mummy  from  Meydum,  conclusively  prove  the  purpose  of  the 
packets  of  malachite  generally  found  in  the  graves,  and  the  palette  and  pebble  used  to 
grind  it.     The  uaz  green  malachite  paint  appears  in  the  early  lists  of  tomb  offerings. 

Now  these  paint  palettes  are  found  of  the  triangular  form,  with  decoration 
along  the  flat  top,  like  the  palette  of  Narmer ;  also  of  the  rounded  rhomboid  form, 
like  the  animal  palette  of  Hierakonpolis.  There  is  no  break  between  the  plain 
slate  palette,  the  palette  with  single  incised  figures,  with  reliefs,  and  the  same  form 
with  more  figures.  Even  the  latest  and  greatest  of  all  retains  the  grinding  pan  for 
the  colour.  That  a  slate  palette  should  be  so  decorated  and  become  an  historical 
monument  is  not  a  whit  more  surprising  than  the  early  wooden  snuff  box  becoming 
a  vehicle  for  the  finest  miniature  painting  and  the  richest  jewellery,  and  even 
becoming  an  elaborate  musical  instrument.  Among  the  preparations  for  royal 
festivals  probably  the  correct  painting  of  the  eyes  would  have  a  place ;  for  that  a 
palette  was  wanted ;  it  would  be  consecrated  by  the  ceremony  to  remain  in  the 
temple ;  it  would  naturally  receive  some  record  of  the  great  occasion  of  the  festival, 
and  this  would  e.xpand  into  the  historical  documents  which  we  know.  Exactly  in 
the  same  way,  the  labels  tied  on  to  the  offerings  stated  the  event  of  the  year  in 
which  they  were  prepared  and  the  name  of  the  principal  official,  thus  becoming 
historical  records  like  the  palettes.  These  remarks  seem  needful,  as  various  writers 
do  not  appear  to  have  considered  the  unbroken  line  of  descent  of  the  palettes,  and 
the  strong  proofs  of  their  purpose.  Many  other  suggestions  have  been  made  for 
which  there  is  no  evidence,  comparative  or  otherwise. 

The  comparisons  of  this  new  knife  handle  with  other  monuments  are  stated  by 
M.  Bdn^dite.     These  are  : — 

(a)  No  indication  of  ground  line;  no  separation  of  registers;  the  men  and 
animals  are  all  in  space.     This  is  not  seen  on  any  of  the  Hierakonpolis  carvings. 

(Jj)  Water  is  not  represented  ;  boats  are  in  space,  as  on  the  prehistoric  pottery 
and  the  painted  tomb  of  Hierakonpolis  of  S.D.  63. 

(c)  The  men  wear  only  the  girdle  and  sheath,  while  the  hunters  on  the  palette 
of  the  earliest  group  have  the  pleated  kilt.  The  feet  are  also  more  rudimentary 
than  those  of  the  hunters. 

{d)  The  mane  hair  of  the  lions  extends  under  the  body,  as  on  the  earliest 
palettes.  [This  suggests  a  cold-country  lion  needing  hair  to  protect  the  body  from 
snowy  ground.]     The  shoulder  folds  of  the  skin  are  as  on  the  earliest  palettes. 

{e)  The  boats  are  of  the  earliest  forms,  as  on  the  prehistoric  pottery.  The 
parallel  flaking  of  the  flint  knife  belongs  to  the  best  part  of  the  second  prehistoric 


32  E^pt  and  Mesopotamia, 

Age,  and  is  far  superior  to  anything  found  in  the  tombs  of  the  1st  dynasty,  or  at 
Hierakonpolis. 

Lastly,  M.  B6n^dite  dwells  on  the  obviously  Mesopotamian  style  of  the  hero 
and  lions,  and  the  groups  of  fighters.  The  close-cropped  or  shaven  heads  recall 
those  on  the  sculptures  of  Susa  and  Tello.  Other  traces  remain  of  these  influences, 
as  the  human  figure  between  two  rampant  beasts  on  the  prehistoric  paintings 
of  Hierakonpolis,  and  the  figures  between  two  serpo-leopards  on  the  ivory  carving 
of  the  Royal  Age,  also  at  Hierakonpolis.  The  type  had  entered  Egypt  as  far  back 
as  S.D.  63.  The  conclusion  is  drawn  that  there  had  been  gradual  infiltration 
of  successive  immigrations  from  the  East  into  Egypt,  at  least  since  the  highest 
period  of  the  second  prehistoric  Age,  and  that  these  culminated  in  the  final  conquest 
by  the  dynastic  peoples. 

Having  stated  the  fresh  material  and  its  discussion,  there  is  some  need  of 
focussing  all  the  details  into  their  historical  position  ;  also  taking  account  of  some 
other  facts  bearing  on  the  subject.  Though  what  we  know  is  very  scanty  and 
fragmentary,  we  can  begin  to  see  the  continuity  of  the  results  ;  we  need  many  more 
discoveries  to  establish  a  definite  history,  but  a  preliminary  adjustment  is  the  best 
way  to  show  the  meaning  and  importance  of  any  fresh  facts  which  might  be  over- 
looked. To  know  what  to  search  for  is  the  best  way  to  promote  discovery.  The 
following  outline  must  therefore  be  taken  only  as  a  means  toward  the  history,  and 
not  as  complete  in  any  sense. 

The  broad  question  of  the  relative  age  of  the  civilisations  of  Egypt  and 
Mesopotamia  has  been  often  canvassed.  We  now  have  a  strong  suggestion  before 
us  that  advance  was  earlier  on  the  Tigris  than  on  the  Nile.  This  encourages  our 
considering  a  still  more  remote  point.  In  the  comparison  of  the  flint-working  ages 
in  Europe  and  Egypt  (Ancient  Egypt,  1915,  pp.  59,  122),  the  results  seemed  to 
demonstrate  the  general  uniformity  of  types  between  the  East  and  West,  at  each 
of  the  successive  ages.  The  characteristics  of  work  in  France  and  England  appear 
likewise  in  Egypt,  no  matter  what  age  is  examined  ;  this  justifies  further  com- 
parisons. The  Solutrean  types  of  France  were  shown  to  be  closely  reproduced  in 
the  so-called  Fayum  flints  of  Egypt.  These  were  entirely  absent  from  the  series 
of  prehistoric  graves,  while  these  graves  contained  the  e.xact  parallels  to  the 
Magadalenian  flints  which  followed  the  Solutrean.  Hence  it  appeared  that  the 
Fayum  flints,  found  scattered  on  the  desert,  represented  the  earlier  human  work, 
before  the  series  of  prehistoric  graves.  Unhappily,  they  have  been  only  the  subject 
of  native  spoliation,  and  have  never  been  collected  on  the  ground  by  trained 
observers  ;  hence  we  do  not  know  how  they  occur,  whether  in  definite  settlements 
or  if  associated  with  pottery  or  other  work. 

Now  in  the  low  levels  of  the  great  mound  of  Susa,  De  Morgan  found  much 
of  the  first  civilisation.  The  pottery  is  finely  made  and  painted,  as  good  or 
better  than  any  pottery  of  prehistoric  Egypt.  With  this  pottery  there  were  many 
worked  flints  {Delegation  en  Perse,  Mimoires,  XHI,  p.  17),  and  these  were  clearly 
of  the  Solutrean  types,  like  the  Fayum  flints  of  Egypt,  especially  the  lance-shaped 
flints,  rather  thick,  with  finely  notched  edges.  If  the  Solutrean  civilisation  extends 
at  the  same  relative  period  from  Britain  to  Egypt,  it  is  only  logical  to  suppose  that 
the  Persian  examples  are  of  the  same  general  age.  Thus,  the  fine  pottery  of  Susa 
marks  a  civilisation  a  whole  cycle  earlier  than  the  prehistoric  graves  of  Egypt. 
The  Orient  started  fine  work  at  an  earlier  stage  than  the  Mediterranean. 

With  this  result  before  us  there  is  good  reason  to  expect  that  the  East  would 
maintain    its   lead   over   Egypt.     The   first   continuous  civilisation   found  in  the 


Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 


33 


cemeteries  of  Egypt  is  mainly  Algerian,  S.D.  30  to  40.  But  as  early  as  s.D.  38  a  fresh 
influence  came  in,  and  dominated  the  land  by  S.I).  43  ;  this,  by  its  importations,  was 
probably  from  the  East.  It  has  no  products  at  all  on  the  level  of  the  carved  knife- 
handle,  nor  leadfing  to  that,  hence  it  was  not  from  as  far  east  as  Mesopotamia  or 
Susa.  Its  origin  has  been  provisionally  assigned  to  the  Red  Sea  district,  as  it 
introduced  hard-stone  vases,  and  it  had  been  in  slight  contact  with  Egypt  throughout 
all  the  first  civilisation,  shown  by  rare  occurrences  of  its  peculiar  pottery.     Now  we 


5.  Prehistoric  Egypt. 


Entwined  Serpents. 

6.  GUDEA  Vase. 


7.  India. 


Compound  Mace-heads. 

8.  Earliest  Susa.  9,  10.  I'rkhistoric  Egypt. 

11,  12.   Heads  ok  Syrians  of  Artz  ...     .     XlXlh  dynasty. 


have  learned  from  the  new  handle  that,  by  the  middle  of  this  second  civilisation,  an 
entirely  fresh  art  was  coming  into  contact  with  Egypt.  We  must  not  conclude 
that  the  new  people  were  actually  living  in  Upper  Egypt  because  this  knife  was 
found  there.     The  knife  may  very  possibly  have  been  a  spoil  won  in  war  from  the 

C 


34  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 

invaders.  The  scenes  on  it  might  not  refer  to  Egypt  at  all.  The  papyrus  boats 
might  belong  to  the  Delta,  and  be  trading  with  Syria.  We  should  not  overlook 
the  curious  appearance  of  the  conquered  people,  wearing  heavy  masses  of  hair 
coming  down  to  a  point  on  the  shoulder.  This  type  does  not  occur  anywhere  on 
the  slate  palettes  ;  and  the  only  parallel  for  it  is  a  Central  Syrian  people,  Figs.  1 1,  12, 
of  a  city  named  Artz  .  .  .,  in  the  XlXth  dynasty.  If  they  were  the  same  they  must 
have  been  as  far  south  as  Palestine  in  the  prehistoric  Age,  as  the  need  of  clothing 
was  not  felt.  The  Bedawy  now  fight  naked,  and  so  did  the  people  of  Southern 
Greece  in  Mykenaean  times.  There  is  thus  a  considerable  suggestion  that  this 
might  be  a  record  of  a  Syrian  war,  though  the  scene  seems,  perhaps,  more  likely  to 
have  been  in  Egypt. 

The  strong  Mesopotamian  suggestions  of  the  designs  have,  as  we  noted  before, 
no  exact  parallels  in  the  East.  They  seem  the  rather  to  belong  to  a  people 
of  Elamite  or  Tigrian  origin  and  ideas,  who  had  progressed  on  their  own  lines. 
The  presence  of  shipping  as  an  important  factor  would  be  against  their  having 
come  to  Egypt  across  the  Arabian  desert.  The  probability  seems  that  they  had 
branched  off  to  some  settlement  in  the  Persian  Gulf  (such  as  the  Bahreyn  Islands) 
or  on  the  South  Arabian  coast,  and  from  their  second  home  had  brought  its  style 
and  ideas  into  Egypt. 

That  the  crop-headed  people  were  the  ancestors  of  the  dynastic  Egyptians 
seems  sufficiently  probable.  Narmer  and  his  people  were  similarly  cropped  or 
shaven  ;  and  the  three  weapons  here — the  k/ierp,  the  mace,  and  the  curved  knife — 
were  all  used  by  the  dynastic  people. 

We  may  now  turn  to  further  connections  with  the  East.  On  the  miniature 
knife  in  University  College,  the  blade  of  which  is  wrought  precisely  like  the  other 
blades  with  ivory  handles,  there  is  on  one  side  a  group  of  two  twined  serpents  and 
two  rosettes  (Fig.  5).  The  entwined  serpents,  much  more  elaborately  treated,  are 
on  a  vase  of  Gudea,  in  the  Louvre  (Fig.  6).  In  modern  India  the  steles  in  honour 
of  the  naga  serpents  have  the  entwined  serpents  with  rosettes  between  them  (Fig.  7) 
as  in  the  Egyptian  form.  To  trace  the  sources  of  the  Indian  form  would  be 
difficult,  and  would  take  us  but  a  small  part  of  the  way.  The  Egyptian  example 
is  probably  between  8,000  and  9,000  years  old,  and  the  Indian  we  could  not  hope 
to  trace  for  more  than  a  third  of  this  age  at  the  utmost.  It  seems,  however,  clear 
that  the  idea  is  oriental  rather  than  western,  and  this  motive  is  therefore  a  further 
evidence  of  the  oriental  influence  entering  Egypt  and  introducing  the  carved 
ivory  handles. 

Another  oriental  connection  is  the  knobbed  stone  mace-head  from  the  earliest 
levels  of  Susa  (Fig.  8).  This  is  not  unlike  two  compound  mace-heads  from  early 
Egypt:  Fig.  9  of  hard  white  limestone.  Fig.  10  of  greenish-black  steatite.  These 
were  bought  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  almost  certainly  belong  there;  they  are  now  in 
University  College. 

The  Elamite  cylinder-seals  found  by  De  Morgan  were  noted  by  him  as 
resembling  the  style  of  cylinder-seals  of  the  beginning  of  the  1st  dynasty.  But  in 
these,  as  in  the  other  oriental  resemblances,  though  the  style  is  obviously  alike, 
there  is  no  exact  parallel.  Again  we  are  led  to  the  view  of  a  settlement  from  Susa 
or  the  Tigris  developing  its  own  detail  on  the  way  to  Egypt. 

The  signs  of  a  cold  country  in  the  art  are  difficult  to  localise.  The  hero 
holding  the  lions  is  more  like  a  Tatar  prince,  such  as  Kadphises  on  the  coins,  than 
like  the  struggling  naked  Gilgamesh.  He  cannot  have  been  idealised  in  a  hot 
country.     The  lions  having  the  thick  matted  hair  of  the  mane  extending  underneath 


Egypt  and  Mesopotamia.  35 

the  whole  body,  were  not  seen  crouching  in  burning  sands  but  in  snowdrifts, 
like  the  lion  slain  in  a  pit  in  a  time  of  snow  in  Palestine  (2  Sam.  xxiii,  20),  or  the 
tigers  of  Japanese  artists,  wading  in  snow.  All  this  cannot  have  been  accreted 
between  Elam  afed  Egypt ;  it  belongs  to  the  Elamite  mountains,  and  it  shows  that 
the  ideas  of  this  people  were  formed  in  such  regions,  and  so  well  developed  and 
fixed  in  their  minds  that  the  transit  to  a  fresh  centre,  and  on  to  Egypt,  did  not 
modify  their  mythology. 

We  now  turn  to  the  ships  figured  here.  Those  of  the  lowest  line  on  the 
handle  have  the  curved  body  so  marked  in  the  papyrus  boats,  both  in  small 
Egyptian  paintings  and  in  the  scenes  of  boat  building.  This  is  also  the  usual 
type  of  the  boats  in  the  painted  tomb  of  Hierakonpolis,  which  is  co-eval  with  the 
handle.  It  must  be  accepted  here  as  the  Nile  boat,  though  its  arrangement  of 
cabin  and  fittings  do  not  quite  agree  with  the  Hierakonpolis  painting.  Probably 
they  are  respectively  the  Delta  and  Upper  Egyptian  forms.  About  the  other  line 
of  boats,  with  raised  prow  and  stern,  there  is  much  more  question.  The  Hierakon- 
polis tomb  shows  the  fighting  of  two  peoples,  red  and  black,  and  two  types  of  boat 
coloured  red  and  black,  doubtless  as  belonging  to  the  different  peoples.  The  red 
man  is  more  numerous,  he  is  victorious,  and  the  boats  are  red  excepting  one. 
Hence  the  red  man  and  red  boat  of  the  papyrus  type  (on  the  lower  line  on  the 
handle)  is  doubtless  the  dominant  race  of  Egypt  at  that  time,  the  second 
prehistoric  civilisation.  The  black  man  and  the  black  boat,  Fig.  2,  are  the 
invaders.  The  black  boat  of  the  painting  is  of  the  same  type  as  the  upper 
boats  of  the  handle.  Fig.  3.  The  high  raised  prow,  and  the  round  topped  cabin, 
are  opposite  to  the  Egyptian  type.  We  are  thus  led  to  take  the  black  men 
of  the  Hierakonpolis  tomb  scene  as  being  the  conquering  people  of  the  knife 
handle.  In  accord  with  this  the  boat  represented  on  the  palette  of  Narmer  has 
a  raised  prow  and  stern,  similar  to  the  boats  on  the  knife  handle.  The  same  kind 
of  boats,  turned  up  high  at  both  ends,  were  used  by  Mediterranean  people  in  the  war 
against  Ramessu  III  ;  on  a  small  scale  they  are  familiar  now  in  the  same  region. 

The  hunting  scene  shows  that  the  domestication  of  animals  was  advanced. 
The  collared  hunting  dog,  with  ears  pricked  forward  and  a  full  chest,  .seems  like 
a  well-established  type,  far  removed  from  primitive  wolf  or  jackal.  The  serval  or 
lynx  is  a  well  fed  and  muscular  animal,  also  far  removed  from  the  wild  prowler,  and 
evidently  accustomed  to  the  leash. 

After  this  grand  handle  at  the  middle  of  the  second  prehistoric  civili-sation, 
there  are  the  two  other  handles  of  a  decadent  style,  with  long  rows  of  animals. 
Yet,  as  they  also  have  finely  wrought  flint  blades,  they  cannot  be  put  far  from  the 
best  handle.  They  probably  mark  the  imitation  in  Egypt  of  the  foreign  work 
which  we  have  been  considering. 

It  is,  however,  this  foreign  work  which  is  the  parent  of  the  slate  palettes  ;  they 
are  distinctly  the  product  of  the  dynastic  people  in  contrast  to  the  native  style. 

The  conclusion  of  M.  B^n(Jdite  that  there  had  been  a  gradual  infiltration  of  the 
dynastic  people,  during  the  second  prehistoric  Age  before  the  dynastic  conquest,  is 
exactly  in  accord  with  the  results  of  the  anatomical  measurements  at  Tarkhan. 
The  length  of  the  bones  were  grouped  in  five  periods  :  A,  the  early  2nd  civilisation, 
43-69  S.D. ;  B,  the  late  2nd  civilisation,  70-77  .s.n. ;  C,  the  Tarkhan  majority, 
77-82  S.D. ;  D,  the  Tarkhan  minority,  believed  to  be  dynastic  in  race ;  E,  the 
Vl-XIIth  dynasty  people,  showing  to  what  type  the  Egyptian  settled  down. 

On  taking  the  various  long  bones,  which  were  found  to  give  clearer  results 
than  other  parts,  the  leg  bones  together  give  in  both  male  and  female  a  continuous 

c  2 


36  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 

reduction  in  the  successive  classes  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  then  an  expansion  in  the  later 
period  E  back  to  the  size  of  A.  This  shows  that  a  continuous  cause  was  acting  to 
disturb  the  natural  climatic  type,  but  that  after  many  centuries  the  climatic  type 
reasserted  itself,  and  reproduced  the  original  dimension.  In  the  arm  bones  the 
numbers  of  examples  are  so  few — half  a  dozen  or  less — in  some  periods,  that  the 
complete  progress  of  change  is  less  clear.  Taking  the  whole  arm  length  the  order 
is  A,  B,  C,  D,  gradually  decreasing,  and  then  a  recovery  in  later  times  of  the 
dimension  B.  The  humerus  alone  decreases  in  the  male  A,  C,  D.and  returns  to  A; 
in  the  female  A,  B,  D,  returning  to  B.  The  radius  in  tlie  male  decreased  A,  C,  D. 
and  returns  later  to  between  A  and  C  ;  in  the  female  it  decreased  B,  C,  D,  and 
returned  to  between  C  and  D. 

The  actual  changes  in  the  total  leg  bones  are  a  diminution  of  7  per  cent.,  and 
a  return  of  5|  per  cent,  in  the  male  ;  in  the  female  a  reduction  of  2i  per  cent.,  and 
a  return  to  the  earlier  dimensions.  In  the  total  arm  bones  a  reduction  of  11  per 
cent.,  and  later  a  lengthening  of  half  that  amount.  The  changes  are  thus  large 
and  unmistakable,  corresponding  to  several  inches  in  the  stature.  This  result  was 
worked  out,  and  fully  stated  in  Tarkhan  II,  two  years  before  the  appearance  of 
the  conclusions  drawn  from  the  artistic  work  of  the  knife  handles.  The  grounds 
for  this  historical  result  are  therefore  quite  independent.  It  may  be  noted  that  it 
is  in  accord  with  the  history  of  later  Eastern  invasions ;  the  Semites  were  coming 
into  Egypt  under  the  Xllth  dynasty,  and  increasingly  till  the  Hyksos  conquest, 
and  the  Arabs  were  coming  in  under  the  Romans  until  the  Arab  conquest. 
To  sum  up  then,  the  general  presumptions  as  the  case  now  stands  are  : — 
That  the  Elamite  civilisation  developed  in  the  Solutrean  Age,  a  whole  cycle 
before  the  Egyptian  development  in  the  Magdalenian  Age. 

That  a  mountain  people  there  had  a  fixed  mythology  and  ideas  with 
a  developed  art,  far  in  advance  of  Egypt. 

That  these  people  developed  further  in  some  centre  between  Susa  and  Egypt, 
and  thence  moved  on  to  Egypt.  They  were  shaven  or  close-cropped,  like  the 
Sumerians ;  and  they  used  high-prowed  boats.  Other  eastern  tokens  arriving  with 
them  are  the  entwined  serpents  and  rosettes,  and  the  compound  mace-heads. 

These  people  may  have  fought  with  long-haired  Syrians,  and  the  handle  be  in 
commemoration  of  that  conflict ;  possibly  it  was  captured  later  and  taken  to 
Upper  Egypt. 

These  crop-headed  people  are — or  are  akin  to — the  black  men  on  the 
Hierakonpolis  tomb. 

They  are  the  ancestors  of  the  makers  of  the  slate  palettes,  of  Narmer  and  his 
people,  and  the  founders  of  dynastic  art. 

They  were  invading  Egypt  early  in  the  second  prehistoric  civilisation,  and 
continued  to  come  in  greater  numbers  than  they  could  be  assimilated  by  the 
climatic  influences  ;  they  were  about  three  or  four  inches  shorter  than  the  Egyptians, 
and  gradually  shortened  the  stature  of  the  population,  which  later  almost  regained 
its  former  size. 

Gradually,  step  by  step,  we  arc  seeing  more  of  this  rise  of  the  earliest  civilisa- 
tion of  the  Mediterranean  ;  our  progress  may  be  slow,  but  we  see  from  the  present 
discovery  how  much  a  single  object  may  guide  us.  When  we  look  back  a  quarter 
of  a  century  to  the  time  when  we  knew  of  nothing  certain  before  Seneferu,  and 
Mena  was  written  down  as  a  myth,  we  may  well  hope  to  understand  much  more 

in  the  future. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


n   ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology.  Vol.  VII, 
Nos.  3-4.  July,  1 9 16.  69  pp.,  14  plates.  Liverpool 
Institute  of  Archaeology. 

[The  previous  half  of  this  volume  appeared  just  before  the  war,  and  was 
summarised  in  Ancient  Egypt,  1914,  p.  171.  After  two  years  the  second  half 
appears  with  a  sad  notification,  that,  owing  to  prevailing  conditions,  a  temporary 
suspension  of  the  publication  is  unavoidable.  This  is  not  surprising  considering 
the  amount  of  war  work  undertaken  by  the  editor,  as  well  as  by  many  contributors. 
It  is  not  the  less  a  sorry  sight  for  a  journal  to  be  eclipsed,  the  more  so  as  this 
number  is  better  than  usual.  We  may  find  everything  eclipsed  beyond  bare 
sustenance  before  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos  takes  place.] 

Sayce,  a.  H. —  The  Stela  of  Amen-renas.  This  is  a  translation  and  discussion 
of  the  great  stele  of  Meroe,  dating  from  the  early  Roman  Period  and  stating  not 
only  current  events,  but  also  historical  references  to  the  early  Ethiopian  kingdom. 
The  translation  given  by  Prof.  Sayce  is  interlinear ;  as  there  are  many  omitted 
and  doubtful  words,  and  no  clear  sentences,  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  the  general  ideas 
of  it.  We  shall  therefore  attempt  a  summary  of  it  here  for  convenience  of  reference, 
always  remembering  that  the  first  attempt  at  translating  a  long  text  in  a  script 
and  language  but  little  understood  must  be  only  tentative. 

The  strongly  marked  female  line  of  the  Ethiopian  succession  is  known  by  the 
genealogy  of  a  line  of  eight  queens  on  the  stele  of  Aspaluta  ;  each  of  these  bore 
a  cartouche  as  mistress  of  Kush,  and  high-priestess  of  Napata,  a  system  copied  in  the 
cartouches  of  the  northern  queens  of  the  Ethiopians  at  Thebes,  from  Shepenapt  I 
to  Gerarheni.  This  appears  on  the  stele  of  Meroe  which  begins  in  the  queen's 
name  and  goes  on  to  "  her  deputy-heir,  prince,  deputy-heir  of  the  queen,  hereditary 
king  of  Roman  Kush,  hereditary  king  of  the  frontier  of  Egypt  and  Etbai."  The 
same  formula  of  titles  is  repeated  for  other  kings.  The  first  paragraph  records  the 
capture  of  12  men  and  115  women  by  Imla,  son  of  Aginirherhe,  who  was  the  king 
under  Queen  Amenrenas.  The  second  relates  the  capture  of  100  men  and 
107  women  serfs  of  the  god  Hapi  of  Biggeh  at  the  First  Cataract,  "  together  with  their 
god  Yika,  god  of  the  land  of  Shesh  "  by  Erhetok(?)  for  his  mother,  Queen  Arbel. 
The  third  raid  was  of  55  (?)  men  and  253  (?)  women  belonging  to  Yika  of  Mam, 
a  region  around  Derr,  captured  by  Ipiali  descendant  of  Yesbe.  "  Amenhetep,  in 
old  time  of  Meroe  .  .  .  lord  of  Korti,  director  of  the  singers  for  the  priests  (?),  lord 
of  .  .  .  who  were  in  neighbouring  territories,  lord  of  the  Medi  of  Uke  (?),  who  was 
in  the  land  of  Thabre  (north  of  Khartum),  a  Ku.shite  from  .  .  .  ,  lord  of  the  princes 
in  the  adjoining  land  of  Uebar,  from  among  the  hereditary  princes  of  the  race  (?) 
of  Irhi,  the  princess  of  old,  the  mistress  of  the  women  and  men  in  war(?)  captured, 
viceroy  of  the  ruler  in  the  land  of  Aton  (Sesibi)  the  Egyptian  of  the  West,  a  Meroite 
godborn  Teie ;    Irhi  was  ....  of  women   and    men    as    follows,  3,400."      Then 

C  3 


38  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 

follows  a  statement  of  spoil,  257  people.  The  syntax  connecting  the  spoil  with 
the  previous  account  is  very  indistinct ;  but  at  least,  if  this  rendering  be  accepted, 
there  is  here  a  reference  to  Amenhetep  III  in  his  position  as  ruler  of  Ethiopia,  and 
a  statement  of  his  descent  from  a  Princess  Irhi,  and  apparently  the  tribe  of  Irhi  is 
stated  at  3,400  people.  There  would  be  nothing  surprising  in  an  Ethiopian  queen 
being  an  ancestress  of  the  black  Aohmcs  Nefertari,  and  hence  of  Amenhetep  III  ; 
such  a  connection  would  be  cherished  in  Ethiopia. 

Then  follows  a  statement  of  the  family  of  King  Aginirherhe  who  set  up  the 
stele :  "  Aginirherhe,  the  royal,  the  deputy  (of  the  queen),  the  lord  of  deputies, 
chief  musician  of  Amen  of  Thebes,  prophet  of  those  (ancestors)  of  Amen's  land 
who  were  chief  musicians,  deputies,  lords,  lovers  (?)  of  his  house  (?),  who  have  been 
kings  of  Napata  since  Mahartosen  and  (?)  Amenarres."  Here  the  descent  of  the 
kings  of  Napata  is  said  to  be  from  the  earlier  kings  Mahartosen  and  Amenarres. 
This  strongly  reminds  us  of  Usertesen  and  Amenemhat  as  founders  of  Ethiopian 

civilisation.  -^^  fD  ^^*^— ^  i^  "^^^  for  a  valiant  man  in  the  XlXth  dynasty; 
what  if  this  were  a  loan  word  brought  from  the  south  by  the  XVIIth  dynasty,  and 
used  as  the  Ethiopian  for  user?  Following  this  is  the  parentage  of  Aginirherhe 
from  a  king  of  the  same  titles  "  from  among  the  princes  of  the  race  of  Irhi  the 
princess  of  old."  Much  else  can  hardly  be  reduced  to  connected  sense,  but  it 
ends  with  a  dedication  of  252  (serfs  ?)  to  Osiris-Hapi  of  Biggeh. 

The  second  great  stela  of  Meroe  is  much  defaced,  but  on  it  is  a  mention  again 
of  the  ancestor-princess  Irhi ;  also  of  Queen  Teie.  The  general  result  is  that  the 
record  was  kept  of  Amenhetep  III  and  Queen  Thyi  as  great  rulers  in  Ethiopia  ; 
that  the  XVII-XVIIIth  dynasties  had  one  of  the  Ethiopian  queens  as  an 
ancestress ;  and  perhaps  the  foundation  of  the  kingdom  was  taken  back  to  the 
great  kings  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  who  conquered  and  governed  the  Sudan. 

Peet,  T.  E. — A  Mortuary  Contract  of  the  Xlth  Egyptian  dynasty.  A  stele 
in  the  British  Museum  of  a  noble,  Antef,  son  of  Mayt,  gives  a  briefer  form  of 
a  contract  for  offerings,  which  is  so  well  known  in  the  long  inscription  of  Hepzefa 
at  Asyut.  Mr.  Peet  states  that  the  source  of  this  stele  seems  to  be  unknown  ; 
in  the  official  Guide  (p.  38)  it  is  stated  to  be  from  Qurneh.  The  stele  is  of  a  usual 
type,  the  noble  standing,  and  his  steward  on  a  smaller  scale  below.  The  titles  are 
the  usual  ones  of  a  great  noble,  and  to  them  are  added  a  list  of  personal  virtues,  as 
often  was  done  in  the  Middle  Kingdom.     "  I  was  one  firm  of  foot,  persevering  of 

plan,  wise,  clever of  heart,  one  who  fed  the  elders,  who  buried  the  aged, 

who  gave  to  the  children  with  his  own  fingers."  In  the  article  there  is  a  proposal 
for  a  conjectural  emendation  to  avoid  the  phrase  "  feeding  the  uru " ;  but  it 
seems  evident  that  the  uru  are  those  who  are  great  in  years,  not  in  wealth. 
Another  notable  phrase  is  :  "  both  of  what  my  own  might  gained  and  of  what 
Nebhepetra  (Mentuhetep)  gained  for  me."  This  reflects  the  age  of  civil  war  in 
Egypt,  the  noble  fighting  on  his  own  account,  and  also  fighting  under  the  king 
and  being  rewarded. 

A  list  of  offerings  follows  "which  the  king  gives  to  Osiris,"  that  is  food-rents 
of  the  king  allocated  to  the  service  of  the  gods  and  of  the  dead.  These  were  in 
some  cases  not  merely  a  pious  expression,  as  "  thousands  of  oxen,"  etc.,  but  were 
specific  endowments,  such  as  "two  shens  cakes  and  two  jugs  of  milk  that  are 
before  the  mouth  of  Ra  himself." 

Two  contracts  for  the  performance  of  funereal  rites  are  then  recorded, — 
contracts  which  were  probably  as  little  regarded  as  the  provision  for  perpetual 


Annals  oj  Archaeology  and  Anthropology.  39 

masses  for  the  founder's  soul  in  the  chapel  of  Henry  VII,  entirely  abolished  by  his 
son.  The  first  contract  is  with  one  Hekhtiu  for  libations  and  offering  of  shens 
bread  and  iu  cakes,  to  the  statue  of  Antef  every  day.  The  other  was  made  with 
a  priest  Antef  tb  perform  service  in  the  tomb,  to  read  the  liturgy  at  every  monthly 
and  half-monthly  festival  "  in  order  that  my  name  may  be  good  and  that  my 
memory  may  exist."  The  payment  for  these  services  were  twenty  parcels  of 
clothes  to  the  daily  priest,  and  ten  parcels  to  the  monthly  priest,  a  man  and  woman 
servant  to  each,  and  the  right  of  irrigation  across  the  noble's  fields.  The  use  of 
the  serfs  would  seem  to  have  been  the  greater  part  of  the  value.  The  clothing 
seems  to  have  been  a  single  gift,  while  the  serfs  would  apparently  be  a  perpetual 
charge  on  the  population  of  the  noble's  estate. 

Seligman,  C.  G. — A  Prehistoric  Site  in  Northern  Kordofan.  The  site 
described  here  is  about  170  miles  south-west  of  Khartum.  Here  stand  four  large 
artificial  mounds,  nine  to  twelve  feet  high ;  they  have  evidently  been  much 
denuded.  On  trenching  through  these  mounds  three  strata  of  human  remains 
were  prominent.  At  the  bottom  were  bones  of  cattle,  sheep,  dog,  and  perhaps 
goat  In  the  mounds  were  much  pottery,  with  stone,  ivory  and  bone  objects. 
The  pottery  bears  a  string-mat  pattern,  showing  the  basis  on  which  the  clay  was 
beaten  out.  Such  a  mat  pattern  is  usual  now  in  Kordofan,  but  does  not  occur  in 
Nubia.  Most  of  the  incised  patterns  seem  to  be  due  to  tooling  with  a  comb 
which  had  about  fifteen  teeth.  Most  of  the  forms  of  pottery  now  used  in  Kordofan 
are  the  same  as  those  in  the  mounds.  Stone  weapons  are  rare,  only  an  arrowhead, 
an  adze,  and  a  fragment  were  found.  Ivory  was  not  common,  only  a  few  worked 
pieces  and  large  beads.  Bone  lance  heads  are  described,  but  they  look  as  if  they 
might  rather  be  netting  bones,  which  are  so  common  in  Egypt,  for  making  fishing 
nets.  The  commonest  objects  are  ostrich  egg-shell  beads.  One  bead  of  carnelian 
is  like  those  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

From  the  mineralised  state  of  the  bones,  and  the  decomposition  of  granite 
fragments,  it  appears  that  the  mounds  are  of  considerable  age.  The  dust  of  which 
they  are  composed  is  identical  with  undisturbed  country  soil,  and  is  not  due  to  the 
washing  down  of  brickwork.  The  accumulation  of  such  a  depth  during  human 
occupation  would  imply  a  long  period.  The  conclusion  that  they  are  of  Ptolemaic 
times,  or  earlier,  seems  quite  probable ;  and  it  would  be  likely  that  they  began 
with  the  extension  of  the  Ethiopian  kingdom  about  the  XXVth  dynasty. 

WOOLLEY,  C.  Leonard. — A  North  Syrian  Cemetery  of  the  Persian  Period. 
The  cemetery  here  described  lies  close  to  the  Baghdad  railway,  to  the  north  of 
Aleppo.  It  has  been  plundered  out  by  the  natives,  and  happily  Mr.  Woolley  has 
gleaned  some  account  of  it.  The  classes  of  objects  found  are  of  considerable 
interest  for  the  trade  of  the  Persian  Period,  and  as  partly  dating  many  things  found 
in  Egypt.  So  many  are  these  connections  that  we  give  a  dozen  outlines  here 
selected  from  the  paper  in  order  to  help  to  date  Egyptian  antiquities.  Most 
unfortunately  the  plate  of  small  objects,  which  would  be  of  the  greatest  interest,  is 
missing  from  the  publication,  owing  to  Mr.  WooUey's  service  abroad. 

The  cemetery  is  close  to  one  of  late  Hittite  Period,  of  which  an  account  was 
quoted  in  ANCIENT  Egypt,  19 14,  pp.  173-4.  As  regards  the  date  of  it,  the 
presence  of  Attic  vases  and  coins  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (early  rather  than  late) 
give  one  fixed  point.  Earlier  than  that  it  is  noted  that  there  are  none  of  the  things 
which  were  usual  in  Carchemish  or  its  cemetery,  which  is  believed  to  have  come  to 

C  4 


40  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 

an  end  in  605  B.C.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  there  anything  of  the  Hellenistic 
Age,  3C0  B.C.  and  onward.  One  closely  dated  object  must  have  been  old  at  the 
time  of  burial ;  this  is  the  scarab  of  Menkara  the  vassal  of  Shabaka,  715-707  B.C. 
This  scarab  is  ascribed  by  Mr.  Woolley  to  re-issues  of  early  kings  by  "Tirhaka 
and  his  successors."  But  we  know  that  Menkara  was  a  king  reigning  about  this 
time,  as  there  is  a  late  papyrus  of  his  son  in  the  Parma  Museum,  and  a  cylinder 
with  the  names  of  Shabaka  and  Menkara  shows  his  position.  Another  early 
suggestion  is  given  by  the  resemblance  of  the  graves  and  contents  to  those  found 
at  Gezer  which  are  attributed  to  the  ninth  or  eighth  century  B.C.  It  seems  that  we 
cannot  get  closer  than  dating  the  cemetery  between  650  and  450  B.C.  The  village 
of  Deve  Huyuk  close  by  evidently  continued  into  the  Roman  Age,  by  the  inscribed 
stones  reported  ;  one  of  these  appears,  by  the  illustration,  to  bear  the  date  449, 
probably  of  the  Seleucidan  era,  that  is  A.D.  1 38. 

Referring  now  to  the  figures  given  here  (which  bear  no  relation  to  each  other 
in  scale).  Fig.  i  is  a  well  known  form,  like  the  large  alabastra  which  were  smashed 
and  buried  in  the  palace  of  Apries,  probably  at  525  B.C. ;  about  600-550  B.C.  would 
be  a  likely  date.  Fig.  2,  of  alabaster,  is  a  clumsy  form  descended  from  the  XlXth 
dynasty,  but  the  futile  handles  on  it  show  that  it  belongs  to  the  XXVIth  dynasty. 
Fig.  3  is  stated  to  be  an  imitation  of  Egyptian  pottery ;  but  exactly  the  same  are 
known  in  Egypt,  and  it  was  doubtless  imported  to  Syria  like  the  alabaster  vases. 
Fig.  4  is  a  silver  earring  with  radiating  balls,  a  type  which  is  stated  to  extend  to 
Ephesos.  This  also  occurs  in  Egypt.  The  pattern  of  a  triangular  pile  of  minute 
globules  is  frequent  in  the  XXVIth  dynasty.  Fig.  5  is  one  of  the  various  forms  of 
bronze  bowls,  which  are  fairly  common  ;  this  is  more  like  a  usual  Egyptian  type, 
others  in  Syria  are  flatter,  or  have  godroons  like  the  silver  vases  from  Mendes,  or 
are  plain  hemispherical  or  open  bowls.  The  cylinder  pot  of  bronze  is  also  found, 
which  is  probably  a  measure  as  in  Egypt.  Fig.  6,  the  pierced  toggle  pin,  is 
stated  to  be  widely  spread  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia.  It  is  also  found  in  Egypt 
in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  doubtless  imported  from  Asia.  Fig.  7  is  the  common 
form  of  situla  in  Egypt ;  it  was  found  with  a  godrooned  bowl.  The  Egyptian 
situlae  are  usually  of  about  the  XXIIIrd-XXVth  dynasties.  Fig.  8  is  the  three- 
bladed  Scythian  arrowhead  which  appears  to  be  unknown  in  Egypt  until  the  great 
Scythian  invasion  of  Syria  in  624  B.C.  Fig.  9  is  like  the  graters  of  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty.  It  is  suggested  that  it  might  otherwise  have  been  a  strainer  attached  to 
a  syphon  tube.  Similar  cones  are  also  of  Roman  Age  in  the  Sudan.  Fig.  10  is  an 
alabaster  slab  with  shallow  saucers  in  it,  divided  by  a  lotus  pattern  of  Assyrian  style. 
Such  modified  lotus  is  often  seen  in  Egypt,  and  usually  supposed  to  be  of  the  Persian 
Age.  Fig.  1 1  is  a  horse  bit  with  curved  side  bars  like  those  from  Georgia,  and 
figured  on  the  Assyrian  sculptures.  The  Georgian  bits  have  not  the  spiked  cross- 
bit,  nor  have  the  Egyptian  ;  but  this  type  is  stated  to  be  identical  with  some 
Scythian  bits.  Fig.  12  is  one  of  a  class  of  similar  fibulae  common  in  this  Syrian 
cemetery,  and  said  to  be  like  others  of  Cyprus,  Asia  Minor  and  South  Russia, 
1200-600  B.C.  This  was  found  with  the  Menkara  scarab  of  about  700  B.C.  It  is 
almost  like  a  fibula  found  at  Yehudiyeh  {Hyksos  and  Israelite  Cities,  XXa),  and 
there  supposed  to  be  of  the  XXVIth  dynasty. 

Next  may  be  noted  various  other  objects  not  figured  here.  Mirrors  were 
usual,  apparently  of  cast  bronze,  with  a  long  tang ;  they  are  almost  circular,  but 
slightly  drawn  down  to  the  handle,  a  form  of  about  700  B.C.,  the  entirely  circular 
form  belonging  to  500  B.C.  and  onward.  This,  therefore,  points  to  the  earlier  date 
for  the  cemetery.     Shallow  pans,  much  like  mirrors  in  outline  but  much  hollowed 


A>i7ials  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology. 


41 


and  wider  in  the  handle,  are  found  in  this  cemetery  ;  such  were  made  in  Egypt  from 
the  XVIIIth  to  the  XXVIth  dynasty.  Iron  swords  three  feet  long  are  quite 
un-Egyptian,  but  are  probably  like  the  sword  of  the  Persian  Age  found  in  the 
palace  of  AprJfe  {Memphis  III,  xxxviii).     Bracelets  and  anklets  of  bronze  were 


Objects  from  a  North  Syrian  Cemetery,   650-450  b.c. 


common,  with  slightly  cut  dogs'  heads  or  snake  heads  on  the  ends.  Such  are 
stated  to  be  also  Scythian.  Thick  bracelets  and  anklets  in  Egypt  have  similar 
heads,  and  also  fish,  cut  on  the  ends  ;  their  age  has  been  hitherto  unknown.  There 
were  many  glazed  amulets  of  Egyptian  gods  of  the  usual  late  style ;  but  the  glazed 


42  Bulletin  de  FInstitut  Egyptien. 

pottery  seems  to  be  entirely  Syrian.  Many  of  the  variegated  glass  jug  vases  were 
found,  of  the  late  style  like  the  so-called  Cumean  glass,  of  about  800-600  B.C.  It 
was  mainly  because  of  the  demand  for  these  by  dealers,  that  the  plundering  of  the 
cemetery  took  place.  Of  purely  Asiatic  style  may  be  noted  the  chapes  of  swords, 
with  what  is  stated  to  be  the  head  of  a  ram,  but  which  looks  more  like  a  degrada- 
tion of  two  elephants'  heads  ;  also  many  conical  seals  with  late  Mesopotamian 
designs,  as  a  figure  sacrificing  or  praying  to  the  Moon-god. 

Altogether,  this  cemetery  shows  the  great  mixture  that  was  going  on  through 
the  eastern  world  about  600  B.C.  The  Scythian  movements  driving  much  northern 
work  down  ;  the  Egyptian  trade  and  supremacy  in  manufactures  leading  alabaster, 
bronze  and  pottery  northward  to  the  top  of  Syria  ;  the  Persian  domination  of  Asia 
Minor  and  Egypt  bringing  fashions  in  from  the  East ;  the  pervasive  Greek 
mercenary  and  trader  insinuating  his  style  from  the  West.  It  will  be  most 
desirable  to  publish  all  these  things  in  groups  on  an  adequate  scale,  and  this 
discovery  lifts  a  corner  of  the  veil  from  all  the  mass  of  archaeology  which  awaits 
us  when  civilised  powers  shall  hold  Syria  and  the  East. 


Bulletin  de  I'Institut  Rgyptien.     1915. 

Deux  Clepsydras  Antiques.     Daressy,  G.  {Bull.  Inst.  Egypt,  V,  ix,  1915). 

In  this  Paper  a  full  account  is  given  of  two  clepsydra  vessels  in  the  Cairo 
Museum,  which  were  to  be  filled  with  water,  and  the  lapse  of  time  read  off  on 
graduations  inside  as  the  fluid  dropped  out.  There  were  various  fancy  devices 
in  the  classical  times  for  indicating  the  level  by  floats ;  whether  such  were  used 
in  these  instances  is  immaterial,  as  the  graduations  inside  show  decisively  how 
they  were  to  be  read. 

Both  vessels  alike  have  twelve  lines  down  the  inside  from  top  to  bottom  ;  and, 
as  in  one  case,  they  have  the  names  of  the  twelve  months  placed  over  them 
respectively,  it  is  clear  that  a  different  upright  line  was  read  each  month.  Further, 
there  are  twelve  lines  around  the  side  in  one,  presumably  corresponding  to  twelve 
hours,  and  eleven  lines  with  the  top  edge,  making  twelve,  in  the  other ;  and  these 
lines,  while  parallel  at  the  top,  become  increasingly  tilted  going  toward  the  bottom. 
Each  vessel  has  a  dropping  hole  near  the  bottom.  Such  are  the  main  features  in 
common  to  both  clepsydras. 

The  earlier  vessel  is  the  more  precise  and  interesting.  In  the  section  here 
copied  from  M.  Daressy,  the  mean  line  through  each  row  of  points  has  been  drawn 
outside  of  the  vessel  to  demonstrate  the  increasing  tilt  on  descending  in  the  vessel. 
The  bowl  itself  is  of  alabaster,  I4'6  inches  high  outside,  I2'6  inside.  Top  diameter 
1 8-9  and  I7"4  ;  base  diameter  iO'2  out,  8-5  inside.  It  has  been  broken  up,  anciently, 
but  most  of  the  pieces  have  been  recovered  in  the  clearance  of  the  ruins  of 
Karnak  by  M.  Legrain.  The  vessel  bears  figures  of  gods  and  inscriptions,  naming 
Amenhetep  III;  this  dates  the  bowl  to  1380  B.C.,  or  within  thirty  years  before 
that.  The  vertical  lines  and  hour  lines  around  are  marked  by  small  drill  holes. 
The  signs  at  the  bottom  shown  here  mean  life  and  stability,  they  are  often  used 
decoratively,  and  have  no  connection  with  the  measurement. 

How  are  we  to  understand  this  variation  in  the  level  along  with  the  month  of 
reading?  M.  Daressy  concludes  that  the  variation  was  to  allow  of  the  intervals 
corresponding  to  the  longer  or  shorter  hours  of  the  night  But  on  comparing  the 
lengths  with  the  actual  length  of  the  night,  it  is  shown  that  the  variation  of  the 


Bulletin  de  I'Institut  Egyptien.  43 

long  and  short  nights  is  nearly  double  the  actual  variation  of  the  scales  of  summer 
and  winter.  We  can  go  further  by  the  marking  of  the  names  of  the  separate 
months.  The  first  month  was  Thoth,  and  the  largest  scale  here  is  of  the  month 
Hathor,  beginmng  17th  September,  and  the  shortest  scale  is  of  Pachons,  which 
began  14th  March  in  1380  B.C.  Now  this  is  contrary  to  the  theory,  as  the  maximum 
and  minimum  are  not  at  the  solstices,  as  they  should  be.  Evidently  we  must  look 
elsewhere  for  an  explanation. 

A  matter  often  overlooked — even  in  canal  discharges — is  the  large  variation 
in  the  viscosity  of  water  with  temperature.  Much  more  will  flow  through  a  pipe 
as  the  temperature  is  raised  ;  at  boiling  point  the  flow  is  six  times  the  amount  that 
it  is  when  near  freezing.  If  this  difference  in  the  greater  length  of  the  summer 
scale  were  to  compensate  for  the  quicker  flow  of  the  water,  it  would  imply  in  the 
Karnak  clepsydra  a  variation  of  15:17  in  the  rate.  At  about  70°  Fahr.,  the  mean 
temperature  of  Egypt,  this  would  imply  a  change  of  temperature  of  about  9°  Fahr. 
between  summer  and  winter.  As  these  clepsydra  were  probably  placed  in  the  inner 
chambers  of  very  massively  built  temples,  with  walls  many  feet  thick,  and  close 
to  the  ground,  it  is  likely  that  the  change  with  the  seasons  might  not  exceed  this. 


Section  of  the 
Clepsydra  of  Amenhetep  III.     Karnak. 

Further,  the  maximum  is  in  the  middle  of  September,  and  the  minimum  in  the 
middle  of  March,  and  those  would  be  about  the  times  of  highest  and  lowest 
temperature,  delayed  by  the  massive  building,  and  the  conduction  of  heat  through 
the  earth.  Thus  the  compensation  for  the  viscosity  of  water  agrees  with  the 
amount  and  the  time  of  the  change  of  scale.  Probably  it  was  empirically  noticed 
that  the  rate  of  flow  varied  in  summer  and  winter,  and  the  scales  were  made  to 
compensate  this. 

The  Egyptian  had  gone  further  than  this.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  bowl  has 
very  sloping  sides,  and  M.  Daressy  remarks  this  as  an  evidence  of  the  merely 
ornamental  nature  of  the  work,  as  it  would  contain  much  more  water  between  the 
upper  than  between  the  lower  divisions.  He  concludes,  therefore,  that  this  work 
was  fanciful,  and  was  rendered  useless  by  reason  of  ignorance.  It  is  precisely  this 
form  which  renders  it  more  exact  than  a  cylindrical  vessel.  P'luid  drops  faster  in 
proportion  to  the  pressure  ;  when  the  clepsydra  was  full,  it  would  drop  nearly  four 
times  as  fast  as  when  the  water  had  gone  down  to  the  lowest  graduation.  This 
change  of  rate  the  Egyptian  tried  to  compensate  by  increasing  the  amount  in  the 
upper  level.s.     Strictly,  a  parabolic  outline  is  needed  for  a  vessel  with  an  equal 


44  Bulletin  de  rinstitut  Egyptien. 

scale  down  it.  This  was  nearly  attained  by  taking  a  frustum  of  a  cone  and  not 
carrying  the  scale  to  the  bottom.  The  variation  from  a  parabola  over  the  part 
used  would  not  be  large.  On  testing  this,  the  rate  of  dropping,  when  the  water 
was  at  the  top  or  bottom  of  the  scale,  would  vary  as  i  :  37,  and  the  ratio  of 
the  areas  or  quantity  of  water  at  those  levels  is  i  : 26.  Further,  the  scale  is  rather 
more  open  at  the  top  than  below,  which  would  make  the  ratio  of  quantities  i  :  29. 
Thus  the  sloping  form  of  the  bowl  and  variation  of  graduation  compensate  more 
than  three  quarters  of  the  error  due  to  the  variable  head  of  water.  As  the  flow 
averaged  nine  drops  a  second,  it  must  have  been  a  stream  at  the  beginning,  ending 
in  rapid  drops. 

It  appears  then  that  by  1380  B.C.,  the  clepsydra  was  mainly  compensated, 
both  for  the  changes  of  water  level  and  for  the  changes  of  temperature.  The 
knowledge  of  this  was  kept  up  in  Egypt,  as  Athenaeus,  of  Naukratis,  in  the  third 
century  a.d.,  says  that  water  "  which  is  used  in  hourglasses  does  not  make  the 
hours  in  winter  the  same  as  those  in  summer,  but  longer,  for  the  flow  is  slower 
on  account  of  the  increased  density  of  the  water"  (II,  16). 


Section  of  the 
Clepsydra  of  Eufu. 

The  second  clepsydra  is  from  Edfu,  of  apparently  the  Ptolemaic  Age.  It  is  a 
cylinder  of  hard  limestone,  with  a  cornice  round  the  outside  and  an  expansion  of 
the  cylinder  at  the  top,  probably  to  hold  a  lid.  It  is  I4"9  inches  high,  I3'5  across 
at  the  top  and  i  r8  below.  Inside,  the  graduated  cylinder  is  I0"8  deep  and  6'6 
across.  The  vertical  lines  of  the  months  are  not  equally  spaced.  The  circumference 
seems  to  have  been  divided  by  halving  into  eighths ;  then  two  months  on  each 
side,  at  the  maximum  slope  of  the  circular  lines,  have  been  subdivided.  The 
effect  would  be  to  agree  with  a  lengthening  out  of  the  mid-season  period  and  a 
shortening  of  the  hot  and  cold  period.  The  difference  between  hot  and  cold 
season  is  rather  greater  than  in  the  Karnak  clepsydra,  agreeing  to  a  fluctuation 
from  about  68°  to  80°  Fahr.  There  was  thus  the  temperature  compensation  as  in 
the  earlier  example ;  but  being  a  cylinder,  and  having  equal  divisions,  there  was 
no  compensation  for  the  flow  varying  by  the  pressure.  Owing  to  carrying  down 
the  divisions  close  to  the  bottom,  this  variation  is  the  greater,  and  the  flow  at  the 
beginning  would  be  eighteen  times  quicker  than  at  the  end.  It  would  be  by 
drops,  as  they  would  average  only  two  drops  a  second. 

The  monthly  variation  in  the  flow  being  then  fully  accounted  for  by  the 
temperature  compensation,  it  follows  that  the  Egyptian  used  equal  hours,  and  did 


Iron  and  Steel  Institute.  45 

not  lengthen  or  shorten  them  according  to  the  seasons.  This  is  what  we  might 
expect  from  the  accurate  astronomical  observation  of  early  date,  proved  by  the 
precise  agreement  of  the  pyramids  to  the  cardinal  points.  In  this  the  Greek  and 
Roman  usage  w'is  more  primitive,  as  they  divided  the  day  and  night  into  twelve 
hours,  of  whatever  length  the  season  made  them,  as  the  Turk  does  at  present. 
Hence  adjustments  were  required  to  regulate  the  flow  of  clepsydras  according  to 
the  length  of  the  day,  as  described  by  Vitruvius  in  VIII,  ix. 

A  point  of  Egyptian  usage  should  be  noted.  Although  Mesore  was  reckoned 
the  first  month  of  the  year  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  yet  by  1 380  B.C.  Thoth  was  the 
first  month,  as  the  third  month  on  the  clepsydra  has  the  figure  of  Hathor,  fixing 
that  month  to  be  hers.  The  Thoth  year  is,  therefore,  to  be  used  in  all  reckonings 
of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  agreeing  with  its  being  more  correct,  astronomically,  than 
the  Mesore  year  from  1700  B.C.  onward. 

L'Eau  dans  I^gypte  Antique. — Daressy,  GEORGES.  {Mt'moires  de  I'lnstitut 
Egyptian,!:.  VIII.) 

This  Paper  gives  an  account  of  the  attention  of  the  Egyptians  to  water  supply. 
Regarding  the  sinking  of  the  Delta  there  is  quoted  a  Nilometer  of  Byzantine  date 
near  Kafr  Dawar,  the  base  of  which  was  r055  metres  below  sea  level,  which  proves 
a  sinking  of  at  least  this  amount  in  fifteen  centuries.  Maqrizi  states  that  Lake 
Menzaleh  was  flooded  by  the  sea  in  A.D.  554,  that  is,  in  the  reign  of  Justinian. 
A  translation  is  given  of  an  Oasis  stele  of  the  XXI Ind  dynasty,  recording  the 
natural  and  artificial  reservoirs  made  there,  and  a  dispute  as  to  ownership  decided 
by  oracle,  to  which  sixteen  witnesses  added  their  names.  Also  a  translation  of 
another  Nubian  stele,  of  Ramessu  II,  concerning  his  orders  to  cut  reservoirs  on  the 
road  to  the  gold  mines.  It  mentions  that  under  Sety  I  they  had  sunk  120  cubits 
(200  feet)  without  reaching  water,  no  light  task  through  rock.  His  son  succeeded 
in  getting  a  supply,  by  only  sinking  a  tenth  of  the  distance. 


Iron  and  Steel  Institute.     Autumn  Meeting,   1916. 

The  Use  of  Meteoric  Iron  by  Primitive  Man. — ZiMMER,  G.  F.  8vo,  44  pp., 
9  plates. 

This  Paper  is  a  valuable  and  conclusive  study  regarding  the  early  source  of 
iron  from  meteors.  Hitherto  there  has  been  a  general  impression  that  meteoric 
iron  was  not  fit  for  immediate  working,  and  that  it  was  too  rare  to  be  practically 
used.  Hence  the  sporadic  appearances  of  iron,  before  regular  smelting  began, 
in  1200  B.C.,  have  been  attributed  to  native  iron  from  lock  sources. 

The  practical  use  of  meteoric  iron  lingered  among  the  Eskimo  until  the  early 
travellers  described  them.  Hans  Egede  in  1721,  Hearne  in  1772,  and  Sabine  in 
1818,  found  that  rude  knives  of  iron  were  in  use,  all  of  meteoric  origin.  It  was 
often  very  economically  used,  with  a  backing  of  other  material  ;  in  one  case  the 
back  of  bone  had  many  little  flakes  of  iron  fitted  into  a  groove.  These  bits  of  iron 
had  been  hammered  ofi"  one  of  the  great  meteorites  of  Melville  Bay  in  Greenland, 
which  are  supposed  to  have  weighed  5,000  tons  originally.  The  softer  mass  has 
been  nearly  half  removed  in  scraps,  as  it  is  a  tough  fibrous  iron,  containing 
8  per  cent,  of  nickel.  The  scraps  when  broken  away  were  hammered  out  cold 
between  stones.     At  least  two  other  sources  of  such  iron  were  used  by  the  Eskimo. 


46  Iron  and  Steel  Institute. 

Similarly,  meteoric  iron  was  used  in  South  America,  near  the  mouth  of  Rio  de 
la  Plata  and  in  Paraguay.  The  Aztecs,  also,  in  Mexico  had  a  small  amount  of 
iron  which  they  prized  above  gold,  and  which  they  asserted  to  come  from  the 
sky.  Of  earlier  times  ornaments  of  nickeliferous  iron  are  found  in  burial  mounds 
of  South-west  Ohio,  also  meteoric  masses  hammered  more  or  less  into  shape. 
These  are  supposed  to  have  been  obtained  from  the  Brenham  meteor  in  Kansas, 
which  weighs  nearly  a  ton,  and  is  of  very  ductile  iron.  Averrhoes  states  that 
excellent  swords  were  made  from  a  meteor  weighing  lOO  pounds  which  fell  near 
Cordova  in  Spain. 

A  list  of  instances  of  meteoric  iron  having  been  wrought  includes  cases  from 
Prussia  (2),  Bohemia,  Hungary,  Russia  (2),  India,  Java,  Senegal,  South  Africa  (2), 
Australia  (2),  North  America  (26),  and  Chile  (4),  43  in  all.  Some  of  these  are  only 
trials,  but  often  the  use  of  the  iron  has  been  on  a  large  scale.  In  Africa  the 
products  include  dishes,  lance  heads,  rifle  bullets,  and  hoes.  In  Java  swords  were 
made  of  it  for  the  Sultan  of  Solo,  and  an  artificial  imitation  was  supplied  to  his 
subjects.  Modern  trials  of  various  meteors  are  instructive.  The  metal  is  in  such 
a  different  condition  to  the  artificial  iron  that  ordinary  methods  of  working  do  not 
succeed.  It  is  to  this  that  the  prejudice  is  due,  that  meteoric  iron  cannot  be 
wrought.  When  rightly  worked  it  was  found  to  be  harder  than  ordinary  iron,  but 
was  not  hardened  by  heating  and  quenching.  This  is  to  be  expected,  as  hardening 
is  due  to  carbon  in  iron.  In  other  instances  the  iron  is  found  to  be  brittle  when 
very  hot,  though  it  can  be  forged  cold  or  moderately  heated.  The  strength  of  the 
iron  after  working  is  much  the  same  as  usual,  and  it  bears  being  sharply  bent. 
Some  of  the  Cape  iron  is  soft,  but  is  elastic  and  hard  after  hammering  cold,  can  be 
rolled  out  thinner  than  paper,  and  polishes  well. 

A  list  is  given  on  eleven  pages  of  287  falls  of  meteorites,  of  which  250  are 
known  to  be  malleable,  32  undetermined,  and  only  5  non-malleable.  They  vary 
from  an  ounce  or  two  up  to  50  tons,  but  mostly  weigh  about  20  pounds.  Smaller 
masses  generally  become  burnt  up  at  a  white  heat  in  passing  through  the  air  ;  so 
probably  the  usual  size  in  space  is  much  less  than  those  that  are  found.  Many 
meteors  when  they  reach  the  earth  are  by  no  means  smooth  masses  which  would 
defy  the  use  of  stone  tools.  The  intense  heat  has  liberated  more  fusible  portions, 
or  made  any  volatile  ingredients  blow  the  metal  into  holes,  so  that  the  fallen  pieces, 
as  illustrated  in  the  Paper,  are  spongy  or  with  irregular  projections.  In  this  way  it 
is  practicable  to  beat  out  or  break  off  portions.  Another  source  of  manageable 
pieces  is  the  breaking  up  of  large  masses  by  heat  when  falling,  or  a  cloud  of  small 
pieces  travelling  together  in  space.  Thus  many  falls  are  multiple,  in  some  cases 
thousands  of  pieces  amounting  altogether  to  over  a  ton,  or  over  5,ckx)  nodules  from 
the  size  of  a  pea  up  to  a  pound  weight.  Thus  the  material  was  often  in  a  form 
which  could  be  easily  worked  by  stone  tools.  Five  pages  are  occupied  with  the 
various  ancient  accounts  of  the  falls  of  meteorites,  or  of  sacred  stones  which  fell 
from  heaven. 

A  most  puzzling  matter  is  the  very  unequal  distribution  of  meteorites  on  the 
world.  The  rotation  of  the  globe  should  expose  every  part  of  it  equally  to  the 
showers  passing  through  space.  They  should  be  equally  distributed  in  every 
longitude,  though  scantier  toward  the  poles  if  moving  in  the  solar  system,  as  they 
would  pass  more  obliquely  through  the  air,  and  so  be  much  more  dissipated  by 
heat.  Yet  actually  the  distribution  recorded  is  extremely  unequal.  To  some 
extent  this  is  in  proportion  to  the  population,  as  the  record  must  depend  on  the 
closeness  with  which  the  ground  is  known.     Those  that  fall  on  dense  forest  or 


Iron  and  Steel  Institute.  47 

scrub  will  scarcely  ever  be  found,  whereas  on  cultivated  land  the  chances  of  discovery 
are  a  thousand  times  greater.  Another  main  factor  is  the  using  up  of  the  obvious 
iron  meteorites  ;  and  conversely  the  ignoring  of  stony  meteors  that  are  of  no  use. 
This  may  be  the  cause  of  this  strange  inequality, 

In  Eastern  hemisphere,  79  iron,  299  stone. 
In  Western  hemisphere,  182  iron,  74  stone. 

It  is  impossible  to  suppose  a  selective  action  in  falling,  and  so  we  are  driven 
to  suppose  that  the  Old  World  iron  falls  have  been  largely  used  up,  and  the  New 
World  iron  falls  have  attracted  most  attention  because  they  could  be  used.  If,  for 
instance,  the  number  of  iron  and  of  stone  falls  was  the  same,  the  distribution  would 
show  that  three-quarters  of  the  Old  World  iron  was  used  up  and  disappeared,  and 
two-thirds  of  the  stone  falls  in  the  New  World  were  ignored  as  not  being  obvious 
or  attractive.  The  one  state  is  due  to  being  an  old  settled  land,  the  other  to  being 
a  new  settled  land.  Yet  such  causes  could  not  account  for  23  falls  of  iron  in  Chile, 
not  one  in  the  neighbouring  Peru,  and  only  one  in  England  ;  or  for  a  dozen  times 
as  many  in  Germany  as  in  France.  All  general  conditions  seem  equal  in  such 
cases,  and  the  great  difference  in  recorded  numbers  has  yet  to  be  explained.  The 
inequalities  of  stone  and  iron  falls  strongly  suggest  how  largely  meteors  have  been 
used  as  a  source  for  iron,  especially  in  earlier  ages  when  the  use  of  ores  was  much 
less  available. 

Now  that  the  whole  question  of  the  early  source  of  iron  has  been  thus  greatly 
cleared,  we  may  look  again  at  the  Egyptian  connections.  The  word  bact-?ie-pei, 
"  bad  of  heaven,"  has  of  course  always  been  a  favourite  argument  for  the  use  of 
meteoric  iron.  The  original  sense  of  bad  is  not  clear,  for  of  course  the  meaning  iron 
is  secondary.  There  are  several  such  words.  Ba-wood  or  palm  is  evidently  a  worn 
form  of  bant  palm.  Bad  "  to  marvel,  or  merit,"  derives  from  budf  "  marvellous," 
and  bua  "  to  praise."  There  seem  to  be  two  original  roots  o(  baa,  a  road  and  a  loaf. 
From  bad  "  a  loaf  of  bread,"  is  ba  "  offering  bread  "  ;  and  as  we  apply  the  terms  for 
bread  to  other  things,  as  a  loaf  of  sugar,  or  of  metal,  or  a  cake  of  copper,  so  the 
Egyptian  transferred  his  word  for  a  loaf  to  copper  or  iron,  or  to  a  block  of  stone. 
Then  as  metalliim  in  Latin  and  metallon  in  Greek  was  the  name  both  of  the  mine  and 
its  product,  so  the  Egyptian  bad  for  stone  or  metal  came  to  mean  a  quarry  or  mine. 
Thus  there  is  exact  analogy  for  the  primitive  word  for  loaf  passing  on  to  mean 
metal  or  stone,  and  then  to  the  source  of  the  metal.  We  maintain  the  word  metal 
for  all  mined  or  quarried  material  when  we  speak  of  road-metal  for  stone.  So 
bad-ne-pet  means  the  stone  or  metal  of  heaven.  The  word  then  became  transferred 
from  metal  iron  to  iron  ore,  the  heavy  haematite  two-thirds  the  weight  of  metal ; 
this  is  shown  by  statuettes  being  described  as  made  of  bad-ne-pet,  and  none  are 
known  of  iron,  but  many  occur  of  haematite. 

We  must  not,  however,  conclude  that  the  frequent  use  of  meteoric  iron  proves 
that  all  sporadic  iron  in  Egypt  was  from  that  source.  Mr.  Zimmer  allows  that  the 
second  earliest  example — that  from  the  Great  Pyramid — was  of  terrestrial  origin. 
If  so,  it  was  probably  from  some  native  iron,  perhaps  produced  by  reduction  from 
basalt  which  contains  10  per  cent.  o{  meiAVic  iron,  and  would  be  strongly  reduced 
when  flowing  red  hot  over  woods.  The  clearing  up  of  the  use  of  meteoric  iron 
opens  the  prospect  of  its  having  been  used  in  Egypt,  but  we  need  analyses  in  each 
case  to  settle  whether  the  source  was  terrestrial  or  celestial. 


(    48     ) 

NOTES   AND   NEWS. 


As  might  be  expected,  there  is  little  to  report  archaeologically  from  Egypt.  There 
is,  naturally,  no  British  party  out  excavating,  nor,  indeed,  is  there  from  any 
European  country ;  the  Antiquities  Department  itself,  like  all  other  Government 
Departments,  is  denuded  of  all  available  men. 

Meanwhile,  the  United  States  continue  to  excavate.  Dr.  Reisner  has  gone  up 
to  Nubia,  where,  no  doubt,  he  will  continue  to  unveil  forgotten  and  unsuspected 
epochs  in  that  country's  civilisation.     Mr.  Fisher  has  returned  to  Denderah. 

In  Cairo,  the  work  of  re-arranging  the  Museum  goes  on  slowly  but  surely  under 
the  direction  of  Mr.  Quibell ;  as  a  matter  of  fact  this  is  due  to  his  individual  efforts, 
which  are  occasionally  supplemented  by  voluntary  help.  Recently,  the  assembling 
and  classifying  of  the  wooden  coffins  have  been  claiming  attention. 

Beyond  this  the  opportunity  is  not  neglected  for  sowing  as  widely  as  possible 
the  good  seed  of  Archaeology,  which  is  offered  by  the  presence  of  large  numbers  of 
soldiers — wounded  and  otherwise.  Large  parties  are  conducted  round  the  Museum 
periodically,  and  though  the  majority  may  find  it  somewhat  tiring,  yet  there  are 
generally  a  few  who  show  quite  a  keen  interest.  In  the  same  spirit  the  lectures 
which  are  arranged  at  the  various  hospitals  and  convalescent  homes  include  their 
proportion  of  Archaeology.  Thus  it  may  be  hoped  that  after  the  war  there  will  be 
found  an  increase  in  the  number  of  those  who  realise  that  a  science  of  Archaeology 
exists,  and  that  it  does  not  mean  only  senseless  curiosities. 

The  same  kind  of  teaching  has  been  taken  in  hand  by  Mr.  Wainwright  with 
Young  Egypt  at  the  Tewfikieh  School,  where  at  present  a  very  enthusiastic 
Archaeological  Society  meets  once  a  week  to  enquire  into  the  Past,  and  intends  to 
make  a  series  of  visits  to  both  the  Antiquities  and  the  Arab  Museums,  and  to  go 
excursions  to  those  ancient  sites  and  monuments  available  from  Cairo.  Moreover, 
it  is  thirsting  to  begin  the  study  of  hieroglyphs,  for  which  it  proposes  to  use 
Miss  Murray's  Elementary  Egyptian  Grammar.  May  good  digestion  wait  on 
appetite ! 

Mr.  Lawrence  is  still  in  Cairo  in  connection  with  the  Intelligence  Department. 
Report  has  it  that  the  design  of  the  new  set  of  stamps  for  the  Shereef  of  Mecca  is 
at  least  in  part  due  to  him. 

Some  short  time  ago  Mr.  Hogarth  was  expected  back  again,  and  has  no  doubt 
arrived  by  now. 

Prof  Myres  has  been  heard  of  as  leading  an  Odyssean  life  "  somewhere  in  the 
Mediterranean." 

M.  Lacau— Sir  Gaston  Maspero's  successor  at  the  head  of  the  Antiquities 
Department — is  still  at  the  War,  as  is  M.  Lefebvre,  the  Chief  Inspector  of  Antiquities 
at  Assiut.  As  Mr.  Firth  is  in  the  Intelligence  Department  at  Port  Said,  the  work  of 
inspecting  all  the  Antiquities  of  Egypt  devolves  upon  Mr.  Edgar,  whose  own 
province  of  the  Delta  was  already  none  too  small. 

One  cannot  but  hope  that  the  coming  year  will  see  the  return  to  a  more  normal 
state  of  affairs  in  Archaeology  as  in  the  other  walks  of  life. 

The  delays  in  the  appearance  of  this  Journal  are  necessarily  due  to  the  war 
conditions  of  all  work  in  England.  In  the  present  number  a  coloured  frontispiece 
is  given  instead  of  the  usual  two  plates  of  portraits  at  the  end. 


u'i 


FIG    1.      ANT,    WEARING    THE    BUNDLE    AMULET. 


A 


ANCIENT   EGYPT. 


SOME   PENDANT   AMULETS. 

The  usual  neck  ornament  for  both  men  and  women  throughout  the  historical 
period  is  a  wide  collar  of  beads.  Occasionally,  however,  the  men  and  boys  wear, 
instead  of  the  wide  bead  collar,  a  pendant  hanging  on  a  string  on  which  beads  are 
also  threaded.  Early  examples  show  that  the  string  was  sufficiently  short  to  allow 
the  pendant  to  lie  in  the  hollow  at  the  base  of  the  throat.  In  the  Vth  dynasty  and 
later,  the  pendant  swung  on  a  level  with  the  breast,  or  even  as  low  as  the  waist. 
In  the  rare  cases  in  which  it  was  worn  with  the  wide  collar,  it  keeps  its  distinctive 
character  as  a  separate  ornament,  the  string  on  which  it  is  slung  being  worn  over 
or  under  the  collar. 

So  far  I  have  found  but  few  instances  of  pendants  being  worn  by  women. 
With  the  exception  of  Ant  (Frontispiece),  the  wife  of  Kagemne  (Bissing, 
Gemnikai,  I,  PI.  21),  the  daughters  of  Tehuti-hetep  (Newberry,  El-Bershek,  I,  PI.  29), 
the  dancing-girl,  Fig.  3  (Davies,  Deir  el-Gebrawi,  II,  PI.  17),  and  a  few  others,  the 
pendant  at  the  neck  appears  to  be  a  purely  masculine  adornment. 


L.S.Pl.LIU 


qiRLIlANCINq 

SHELL  PENDANT  U.clQ.lpi./? 

U.C.L. 

I.  The  pendant  worn  by  Ant,  Fig.  i,  is  clearly  an  amulet,  consisting  of  three 
separate  objects  or  packets  lashed  together  at  intervals  and  forming  a  small  bundle, 
which  is  slung  on  a  string  passing  round  the  neck.  Such  bundle-amulets  are 
known  in  all  countries ;  their  virtue  lies  in  the  contents  of  the  packets,  and  these 
vary  according  to  the  specific  object  desired  to  be  attained. 

The  carved  shell  pendant.  Fig.  2,  of  the  Prehistoric  period,  seems  to  represent 
a  similar  amulet.     There  are  six  bundles  and  the  lashing  is  very  elaborate. 

D 


50 


Some  Pendant  Amulets, 


II.  The  dancing  girl's  pendant,  Fig.  3,  is  composed  of  two  indeterminate 
objects.  From  the  shape  these  might  be  fruits  or  nuts ;  but  the  colour  of  the  oval 
one — blue — indicates  something  artificial.  It  is  possible  that  they  represent  those 
hollow  pear-shaped  or  round  objects  of  blue-glazed  ware  sometimes  found  in  the 
Xllth  and  XVII Ith  dynasties.  The  dancer  wears  round  her  neck  a  wide  band 
composed  of  horizontal  stripes  of  different  colours.  This  does  not  appear  to  be 
what  we  now  call  "  ribbon,"  i.e.,  a  narrow  woven  strip  of  silk  or  other  material  with 


cluW 

Q.R.  pRONr. 


axoo 

D."P]Ipl.20 


M.S.M.I(J.9         M.iM.Ipl.7 


S.qTpl.25    B.Q.IPl5.l5,27 
15 


unm 


B.Q.I  Pl.20 


Q.'R.pl'S?.*         Ii.Pllpl.i6 


a  selvedge  on  each  side.  At  first  sight  it  looks  like  a  strip  of  cloth  cut  to  the 
required  shape  with  the  raw  edges  sewn  down  to  prevent  unravelling.  But  the 
detail  in  the  drawing  of  Tehuti-hetep's  daughter  {El-Bersheh,  I,  Front.)  shows  that 
the  band  round  the  girl's  head  is  of  beadwork,  of  the  same  pattern  as  her  bracelet ; 
and  as  the  band  on  which  the  pendant  hangs  is  of  the  same  design  and  colouring, 
one  may  conclude  that  it  also  is  of  beadwork. 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


SI 


The  strange  pendant,  Fig.  4,  appears  to  be  the  same  as  the  dancing-girl's 
ornament ;  the  description  of  the  colouring  is :  "  Le  corps  bleu ;  aux  deux 
extr^mites  quatre  perles  (rouge,  bleu,  jaunc,  rouge),  les  attaches  blanches  "  (Lacau, 
Sarcophages,  p.  ijg). 

III.  The  next  class  of  pendant,  Figs.  5-47,  is  found  chiefly  in  the  Old  Kingdom, 
occasionally  in  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  but  rarely  later.  There  are  two  forms  of 
it,  both  equally  early ;  in  the  one  form  there  is  only  one  oval  object,  in  the  other 
there  are  two.  The  best  examples  of  the  first  forms  are  Figs.  5,  6,  35,  36.  Of  the 
second  form.  Fig.  28  is  the  clearest. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  object  is  intended  to  be  represented  in  these  forms. 
Figs.  35  and  36  appear  to  represent  some  rounded  object  wrapped  in  cloth,  of  which 
one  end  hangs  down.     In  Fig.  35  the  whole  is  pierced  with  a  spike-like  object ;  in 


B.S.S.IP7? 
MAN 


B.SS.I  7?67 


LD.]r48 


Si 


D.T?I.pL/6 


s.qT:pi.i28 


L.D.I.73 


Bor 


Fig.  36  the  two  projections  are  the  same  size  and  might  form  part  of  the  inner 
portion  of  the  pendant.  Fig.  5  shows  the  projections  very  clearly,  one  is  marked 
with  curved  lines  as  if  to  indicate  a  wrapping  of  cloth,  the  end  of  the  bandage 
hanging  down,  while  the  pendant  itself  looks  like  a  bag.  Fig.  6  is  more  stylised, 
the  amulet  is  not  unlike  an  acorn,  the  projections  being  an  integral  part  of  the  cup 
of  the  acorn.  Dr.  Schafer  proposes  to  see  in  it  a  knot  tied  in  a  linen  band,  but  an 
examination  of  the  examples  given  here  shows  that  this  explanation  cannot  be  the 
right  one,  though  it  has  been  accepted  by  Prof  Valdemar  Schmidt  {P.S.B.A.,  1906, 
p.  268),  and  Dr.  von  Bissing  {Archiv  fiir  Religtonswissensckaft,  Vol.  VIII, 
Appendix). 

This  amulet  is  seen  in  many  varieties,  either  egg-shaped,  Figs.  7,  8,  18-22,  26, 
or  bag-shaped,  Figs.  5,6,9-13,  15-17,  24,  25,  35-47;  the  spike,  which  pierces  it 
diagonally  is  represented  as  two  symmetrical  projections.  Figs.  10,  11,  35,  like  the 

D  2 


52 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


handles  of  a  heart-amulet,  Figs.  9,  15,  or  as  a  straight  bar  across,  Figs.  18,  24-26  ; 
the  projections  are,  however,  usually  asymmetrical. 

Though  the  second  form.  Figs.  27-33,  '^  found  as  early  as  the  Vth  dynasty,  it 
is  more  common  in  the  Middle  Kingdom.  Fig.  27  shows  two  egg-shaped  objects 
pierced  or  pinned  together ;  this  is  very  obviously  the  same  as  the  well-known 
amulet.  Fig.  28,  on  the  breast  of  the  statues  of  Senusert  III  found  at  Deir  el-Bahri. 
The  latest  example  of  this  amulet  that  I  know  is  that  of  Pedu-Amon-Apt,  Fig.  30, 
where  one  projection  branches  at  the  end. 

Figs.  14,  35-47,  are  sketched  from  the  model  amulets  on  necklaces  of  the  Old 
Kingdom  in  the  University  College  collection.  These  amulets  have  been  hitherto 
thought  to  represent  the  clenched  hand  with  the  thumb  projecting  below ;  but 
a  comparison  with  the  amulet  of  the  sculptures  shows  it  to  be  the  same.     The  oval 


S.Q.Tpl.130 


SfNU5£RT  Hr 
H.B.dB.ir|)L2 


PS.BA.1906P268 


^ea 


L.B.III2.82..h.. 


AMENEMHATJH     NEFERHETEP  I 
B.T>.  IT  Lc.  S.42022 


iLeiQ.ipi.24 


S.0.T.pk.l9,20 


shape,  the  asymmetrical  projection  on  either  side,  and  the  long  "  tail "  starting  from 
the  shoulder  and  hanging  below  the  base  of  the  oval,  are  the  same  in  the  models  as 
in  the  sculptures.  The  horizontal  gash  across  the  widest  part  in  the  carnelian 
examples,  is  evidently  intended  to  represent  the  modelling  shown  in  Figs.  5  and  6. 
An  interesting  point  is  that  this  amulet  is  represented  in  the  hieroglyphic  sign 
/^.  The  early  example.  Fig.  34,  sketched  here  is  from  the  tomb  of  Thy  at 
Saqqara,  and  shows  the  oval  object  with  a  horn-like  projection  at  each  side,  and 
the  "  tail "  hanging  over  one  projection  and  reaching  below  the  oval.  The  larger 
projection  of  the  two  is  barred  across  as  in  Fig.  5.  The  amulet  is  slung  on  a  wide 
ribbon  caught  up  at  each  side,  with  the  ends  hanging  down,  so  as  to  form  a  figure 
not  unlike  our  capital  M.     The  sign  reads  dm  "  To  sharpen,"  or  dtm  "  To  unite  " ; 

both  readings  and  meanings  occur  in  the  Pyramid  Texts;  thus,  c;^>  ^\    />)^c:^5> 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


S3 


R"^^^^,  "  Sharpen  thy  knife,  O  Thoth"  (P.  i88,  M.  352,  N.  904).  cz^=.  ^  i^ 
L\>\  1     Q    '  "  He  unites  him  with  my  brother"  (P.  204+8),  c:^^/^  ^^ 

'w/^  I     ~~^  (8111         '   "  Atum  has  united  the  provinces  for  Pepy  " 

(P.  668,  M.  778).  The  meaning  "unite"  would  apply  to  the  amulet,  which  appears 
to  be  held  together  by  the  bandage  and  spike ;  but  this  meaning  is  of  very  little 
value  in  understanding  the  amulet  itself  and  the  reason  for  wearing  it.  In  the  later 
forms  of  the  hieroglyphic  sign  the  shape  of  the  amulet  is  lost ;  and  though  the 
characteristic  M-form  is  retained,  the  ribbons  have  degenerated  into  little  flags,  and 
the  original  appearance  of  the  sign  is  entirely  changed. 

It  is  noticeable  that  the  amulet  is  worn  only  by  persons  of  high  rank,  and  by 


7777777 


WfJTJl 


mm  mm 
44 


them  only  at  certain  times ;  usually  when  the  wearer  is  represented  in  some  sort  of 
religious  aspect,  e.g.,  on  the  false  door,  or  receiving  the  funerary  offerings.  Kings 
do  not  wear  it  till  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  then  not  till  the  latter  half  of  the 
Xllth  dynasty. 

It  is  possible  that  in  the  Old  Kingdom  it  may  be  a  badge,  either  the  sign  of  an 
office  or  of  some  grade  of  rank.  I  have  therefore  collected  the  titles  of  the  owners 
as  given  in  the  scenes  in  which  they  are  represented  wearing  the  amulet.  Where 
one  man  holds  many  offices,  I  have  taken  only  those  which  he  holds  in  common 
with  other  wearers  of  the  pendant  who  have  only  one  or  two  titles.  From  these 
examples  it  would  seem  that  the  grade  of  "^j^  is  indicated,  but  against  this  must 
be  set  the  fact  that  neither  Thy  nor  his  son  hold  any  "^5^  title,  and  the  wife  of 
Kagemni  holds  no  office  at  all.     The  negative  evidence  is  also  important,  in  that 

D  3 


54 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


there  are  many  nobles  and  officials  in  the  Old  Kingdom  with  the  rank  of  "^ 
who  wear  no  pendant  or  any  neck  ornament  except  the  wide  bead  collar. 


°1< 

<=Xo  D 
oAo  D 
£iAci    D 

oAo  a 

D 


Son  of 


p^^ 


-^2  (child) 

1a^|f^(»|'il'i) 

-^  ft  L.D.  II,  97a. 


L.D.  11,48. 

/Q.R.  Pis.  31,  33. 
ID.P.  I,  PI.  16. 

D.P.  II,  Pis.  6,  33. 
D.P.  II,  Pi.  16. 
Q.R.  Front  : 
M.S.M.  I,  Pi.  9. 
B.G.  I,  Pi.  21. 
M.S.M.  I,  PI.  24. 
M.S.M.  I,  Pi.  7. 
B.G.  I,  PI.  15. 
S.G.T.  PI.  121. 


IV.  Several  other  little  pendants  or  amulets  for  the  neck  are  found  in  the  Old 
Kingdom.  Of  these,  the  form  shown  in  Figs.  48  and  49  does  not  occur  later.  It 
consists  of  a  large  circular  object  in  the  centre  surrounded,  in  the  one  case  by  seven, 
in  the  other  by  six,  smaller  circles.  Hu-heta,  Fig.  48,  wears  his  amulet  close  round 
his  throat  in  the  fashion  common  in  the  llird  and  early  IVth  dynasties;  on  each 
side  of  the  pendant  is  a  cylinder  bead.  Thy's  pendant,  Fig.  49,  hangs  low,  slung 
on  a  long  string.  As  no  colour  is  indicated  in  either  example  it  is  impossible  to 
know  the  material  of  this  amulet ;  the  form  however  suggests  metal. 

V.  Another  early  amulet  is  that  of  Methen,  Fig.  50,  worn  as  usual  close  to  the 
throat.  The  representation  suggests  a  natural  object,  such  as  a  fir-cone,  or  the 
sprout  of  some  plant.  The  stringing  with  only  one  cylinder  bead  beside  the 
pendant  is  worth  noting. 

Fig-  5 1 1  worn  by  the  child  Thy,  appears  to  be  a  degenerate  form  of  the  same 
amulet.  The  detail  has  been  lost  with  the  exception  of  the  characteristic  calyx-like 
top.     It  hangs  on  a  long  string  on  which  are  cylinder  beads  at  intervals. 

VI.  The  amulets.  Figs.  52-55,  appear  to  be  of  one  class.  They  are  an  artificial 
object  as  the  colour  shows.  Fig.  52  is  coloured  blue,  and  therefore  represents  a  blue 
stone, — lazuli  or  turquoise, — glazed  ware,  or  metal,  possibly  copper ;  the  beads  are 
white,  and  the  string  black.  Fig.  53  belongs  to  the  Middle  Kingdom  ;  the  pendant 
is  red,  probably  camelian  ;  the  beads  are  blue,  green,  and  red,  again  representing 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


55 


stones.  Fig.  54  also  belongs  to  the  Middle  Kingdom.  Here  the  artificial  character 
of  the  amulet  is  clearly  seen,  the  large  oval  object  having  two  rounded  projections 
lashed  to  it.  The  central  object  and  both  projections  are  coloured  dark  green,  the 
lashing  is  yellow^.  The  necklace  is  probably  shortened  by  the  artist  for  exigencies 
of  space  ;  it  consists  of  four  globular  beads,  alternately  red  and  green,  on  each  side, 
and  the  red  strings  which  secure  the  necklace  terminate  in  loops  like  the  hieroglyph 

s=3 .     The    name    of    this    necklace    is  ^100'^)   menqebyt.     Fig.    5  S    has 

a  projection  at  the  end  as  well  as  one  on  each  side.     No  description  of  it  is  given, 

only   the   name  (]<::::>■  T,  arykhekh,   "That  which  belongs  to  the  throat."     It  is 

threaded  on  a  string  on  which  small  globular  beads  are  also  threaded  at  irregular 
intervals. 


S.TQ.pl.lS2 


S.Q.Tpl.130 


CAIRO  CAT/tLOaUE 
STATUES.  129. 


LA.SARC.  Ull 
28091 


VII.  The  remaining  examples  cannot  be  put  into  any  class  :  Rahetep's  amulet, 
Fig.  56,  is  indicated  in  paint  on  his  statue.  It  lies  close  to  the  neck  as  befits  the 
early  date,  and  is  fastened  by  a  plain  string  on  which,  as  on  Methen's,  there  is  one 
cylinder  bead.  The  colour  of  the  pendant  is  grey,  of  the  bead  green,  of  the  string 
white.  Fig.  57  appears  to  be  a  degenerate  form  of  Fig.  56.  The  sharp  projections 
are  rounded,  and  the  shape  is  even  more  indeterminate  than  its  original.  It  will 
require  several  more  examples  of  this  amulet  before  it  is  possible  even  to  hazard 
a  guess  as  to  its  origin  and  meaning. 

Methen's  pendant.  Fig.  58,  is  totally  unlike  his  other  amulet.  Fig.  50,  and 
cannot  be  intended  for  the  same ;  it  must  therefore  be  considered  as  a  distinct 
form. 

F'g-  59  also  does  not  suggest  a  connection  with  any  of  the  amulets  previously 
described.  The  pendant  is  red,  and  the  beads  red  and  green,  showing  that  they 
were  all  of  stone. 

The  Stringing. — The  different  methods  of  stringing  are  very  interesting.  In 
the  early  examples  the  amulet  is  threaded  on  a  short  string,  and  therefore  lies  in 

D  4 


56 


Some  Pendant  Amulets. 


the  supra-sternal  notch.  The  string  which  carries  Ant's  amulet,  No.  i,  is  plain  and 
without  further  ornament ;  Rahetep's,  No.  53,  and  Methen's,  No.  47,  have  each  one 
cylinder  bead  close  to  the  amulet  ;  Hu-heta's,  No.  45,  has  a  cylinder  bead  on  each 
side  of  the  pendant  The  use  of  the  bead  thus  strung  is  obviously  important  and 
it  probably  had  a  talismanic  character.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  in  the  Old 
Kingdom,  beads  on  the  string  which  carries  the  amulet  are  always  cylindrical. 
There  must  be  some  definite  reason  for  this,  as  globular  beads,  ring  beads,  barrel 
beads  and  several  other  varieties  of  form  were  known  at  that  period.  It  is  therefore 
clear  that  special  importance  of  a -magical  or  religious  nature  was  attached  to  the 
cylindrical  form.  In  the  Middle  Kingdom  a  single  oval  bead  with  the  name  of  the 
owner  upon  it  was  worn  on  a  short  string,  so  that  the  bead  lay  against  the  throat 
of  the  wearer.  (Petrie,  Amulets,  PI.  VI,  p.  21.)  I  would  suggest  then  that  the 
single  cylinder  bead  of  the  early  I  Vth  dynasty  is  the  origin  of  the  name-bead  of  the 
Middle  Kingdom,  and  that  it  is  itself  derived  from  the  archaic  cylinders  with  the 

54 


COFPIN  OF  MOnUHCTEP.  Pt.V-B 


v»-o  qO 
C.MUS. 


LA.SARC.LIII 
28037 


:b.S51.'pio9 

9 
I  •  •  ft  • 

name  engraved,  which  were  used  as  rolling  seals  to  mark  the  clay  coverings  of  the 
offerings  to  the  dead. 

There  is  another  point  of  interest  as  regards  the  stringing  of  the  beads.  In 
the  earliest  examples  there  is  only  one  bead  beside  the  amulet,  worn  like  the  amulet 
for  magical  protection.  In  the  Vth  dynasty  the  beads  have  increased  in  number, 
and  are,5worn  quite  as  much  for  decoration  as  for  a  safeguard.  In  the  Middle 
Kingdom  the  talismanic  character  of  the  beads  is  lost,  and  they  are  worn  purely  for 
ornament ;  and  instead  of  cylinders,  globular  beads  are  used.  In  Fig.  48  the  beads 
are  strung  so  closely  as  to  touch  one  another  and  cover  up  the  string.  In  Figs.  55 
and  59  the  beads  are  at  intervals  along  the  string;  in  Fig.  55  these  intervals  are 
irregular,  in  Fig.  59  they  are  regular.  In  both  examples  there  is  a  bead  on  each 
side  of  the  amulet ;  this  is  quite  different  from  the  Vth  dynasty  stringing,  where  the 
beads  are  always  at  a  distance  from  the  pendant. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


(     57     ) 


RACIAL   TYPES   AT   ABU   SIMBEL. 

"Ce  sont  des  photographies  prises  au  kodalc  des  curieuses  representations  de 
captifs,  gravies  %ur  le  socle  d'un  des  colosses  a  I'entrde  du  grand  temple  d'Abou 
Simbel,  le  colosse  pres  du  passage,  a  droite,  lorsqu'on  s'apprete  a  entrer  dans  le 
temple.  D'apres  ce  que  je  sais,  ces  types  de  captifs  n'ont  jamais  ^t^  photographies. 
Je  me  les  avais  dessin^s  a  la  main  en  1890,  et  ce  n'est  qu'en  hiver  1912/1913  que 
j'ai  reussi  a  les  photographier.  Comme,  entre  ces  deux  dates,  certaines  fissures,  qui 
existaient  dans  la  pierre,  ont  et^  ciment^es,  il  est  arriv^  qu'un  des  numeros,  le  lO, 


.i.  '  \  I  I  lit 


\ 


\ 


-^ 


3.  NoRiii  Arabian.  2.  Ak.ml.ma.n. 

Foreigners  from  Abu  Simuel. 

ne  ressemble  plus  en  tout  point  sur  mon  dessin  et  sur  le  photographie  que  je  vous 
envoie.  Sur  cette  derniere  le  menton  a  disparu,  tandis  qu'autrefois,  lorsque  je 
m'etais  dessind  les  visages  des  captifs,  j'avais  vu,  ou  cru  voir,  une  assez  longue 
barbiche.     Aussi  je  donne  ci-joint  le  petit  croquis  fait  en  1890  du  No.  lo, 

"  Peut-etre  vous  interesserait-il  d'identifier  les  diff(6rents  peuples  que  les 
1 1  captifs  devaient  symboliser,  ....  quant  a  moi,  j'y  renonce,  car  toutes  les  series 
de  noms  de  peuples  captifs,  qui  se  trouvent  sur  le  socle  de  diff^rentes  statues  de 
Ramses  II  que  je  connais,  different  entre  elles  et  aucune  ne  semble  correspondre 
aux  1 1  figures  du  socle  d'Abou  Simbel.  "  W.  Gol:^NICHEFF." 


58 


Racial  Types  at  Abu  Simbel. 


The  above  extracts  from  the  letter  of  Prof.  Golenicheff  accompanying  the 
photographs  which  he  has  kindly  sent  for  this  Journal,  explain  the  circumstances, 
and  it  is  with  much  pleasure  that  we  add  some  notes,  comparing  these  with  other 
figures  of  foreigners  in  Egypt. 

The  first  figure  having  lost  the  head,  it  is  not  reproduced  here.  No.  2  is  of 
a  very  peculiar  type,  the  long  retreating  forehead  running  up  to  a  peak  at  the  back 


5.    HiTTITE.  4.    ESDRAELON. 

Foreigners  from  Abu  Simdel. 


of  the  head.  This  seems  to  be  the  same  as  one  of  the  prisoners  of  Heremheb  in 
his  campaign  against  the  Hanebu  {Racial  Types,  V,  2),  and  therefore  a  northern 
people^.  The  peaked  form  of  the  head,  and  the  rolls  of  flesh  on  the  back  of  the 
neck  below  the  occiput,  mark  the  resemblance.  The  same  form  of  head  is 
characteristic  of  the  Armenian  to-day,  though  with  a  larger  nose  (Breasted, 
Ancient  Times,  Fig.  146).  It  seems  then  that  this  is  probably  copied  from  a  nation 
of  the  east  of  Asia  Minor,  somewhere  about  the  head  waters  of  the  Euphrates. 

No.  3  is  very  peculiar  for  the  bushy  hair  cut  short  at  the  base  of  the  skull. 
There  is  no  instance  so  marked  as  this,  but  some  approach  it,  such  as  the  Shasu 
{Racial  Types,  VI,  42)  and  Menti  (95).     It  seems  then  that  this  is  probably  a  North 


Racial  Types  at  Abu  Sinibel. 


59 


Arabian  type.     It  has  traces  of  an  earring,  which  is  northern,  as  in  Assyria  ;  so  it 
may  not  be  far  geographically  from  the  previous  Armenian. 

No.  4  has  the  hair  cut  close,  but  slightly  wavy  all  round  the  head  ;  a  short 
narrow  beard,  a^gmall  aquiline  nose,  and  an  earring  with  a  square  body.  The  wavy 
hair  belongs  to  the  people  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  being  seen  in  the  people  of 
Karpu  .  .  .  ,  or  Harbaj,   six  miles  south-east  of  Haifa,  and  Atha  .  .  .  probably 


7.  Atha.  6.  Kemena. 

foreig.ners  from  abu  slmbel. 

Kafr  Adan,  twenty-seven  miles  south-east  of  Haifa  {Racial  Types,  VHI.  132,  136; 
IX,  138).  The  narrow  beard  is  also  seen  in  Karpu  .  .  .  (VIII,  133).  As  to  the 
general  locality  see  Geba  next  beyond  the  above  in  the  Ramesseum. 

No.  5  is  obviously  Hittite,  by  the  thickness  of  hair  ending  in  a  curl  below  the 
shoulder,  see  Racial  Types,  XI,  156.  There  is  a  ring  in  the  ear  like  the  head  just 
cited,  and  a  band  with  six  large  discs  around  the  head,  perhaps  a  form  of  crown 
worn  by  the  Hittite  chief.  The  face  is  better  executed  than  most  of  the  Hittite 
heads  that  we  know,  and  this  might  well  be  adopted  as  the  type  head. 

No.  6  is  of  the  usual  Syrian  type,  but  is  rather  peculiar  from  the  hair  bulging 
out  so  fully  below  the  head  band.  This  is  seen  on  the  heads  of  the  Amorites,  but 
with  rather  a  shorter  face  {Racial  Types,  VI,  64),  while  the  proportion  of  face  and 


6o 


Racial  Types  at  Abu  Simbel. 


hair  agree  closely  with  the  man  of  Kemena  {Racial  Types,  VIII,  135),  the  Greek 
Kyamon,  now  Tell  Keimun,  twelve  miles  south-east  of  Haifa. 

No.  7  has  .closely  cut  wavy  or  curly  hair.  This  is  the  Karpu  type,  but  most 
closely  in  face  as  well  as  hair  is  it  the  man  of  Atha  ....  {Racial  Types,  IX,  138), 
which  from  the  neighbouring  names  of  Kemena  and  Gaba  is  probably  En  Haddah, 
Greek  Caphar  Outheni,  now  Kafr  Adan,  twenty-seven  miles  south-east  of  Haifa. 

No.  8  is  a  very  different  face,  and  the  distinctive  point  is  the  long  cap  ending 
in  a  sort  of  liripipe.  A  similar  cap  appears  on  the  head  of  a  Syrian  on  the  outside 
of  the  Great  Hall  at  Luqsor  {Racial  Types,  IX,  243),  but  without  any  locality  stated. 


LU 


.^feiM'^VM^ 


I         'I  ■  i»  m 


9.  Palestine  Shasu.  8.  Phoenician. 

Foreigners  from  Abu  Simbel. 

The  clue  is  given  on  the  gates  of  Balawat  where  the  tribute  of  the  ships  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon  is  accompanied  by  Phoenicians  wearing  the  usual  boatman's  knitted  cap 
with  a  turnover  top.  Though  the  top  only  hangs  over  in  one  figure,  the  kind  of 
cap  is  clear,  even  to  the  loose  rucks  in  it.  Hence  we  can  hardly  avoid  assigning 
this  head  to  the  Phoenicians,  probably  of  the  port  of  Haifa,  considering  the 
localities  of  the  other  heads. 

No.  9  has  the  hair-cut  short  behind,  though  less  marked  than  No.  3.  The  thin 
long  beard  is  unlike  the  usual  Syrian,  but  is  that  of  the  Shasu  {Racial  Types,  VI,  42), 
and  the  face  is  as  closely  like  that,  as  if  both  had  been  carved  from  the  same  man. 


Racial  Types  at  Abu  Siinbel. 


6i 


No.  10  is  very  nearly  the  same  type.  As  Prof.  Gol^nicheff  states,  the  chin  and 
beard  have  been  lost,  and  the  space  is  now  filled  with  cement.  I  have  therefore 
copied  on  to  the  blank  the  drawing  made  by  Prof.  Gol^nicheff  previously.  The 
different  characjer  of  the  ground,  and  of  the  lines,  will  make  it  quite  clear  how 
much  depends  on  this  hand  copy.  This  head  is  of  the  general  Shasu  type,  but  in 
the  shape  of  the  head  and  nose  it  is  most  like  the  man  of  Damascus  {Racial 
Types,  VII,  117),  though  his  beard  is  not  so  long.  The  more  forward  growth  of 
the  beard  is  like  that  of  the  Bedawy,  as  in  the  desert  folk  at  Beni  Hasan. 
A  similar  forward  beard  is  seen  on  the  Judeans  of  Sheshenq's  list,  as  of  Ganata  and 


11.  Near  Tyre.  10.  Palestine  Shasu. 

(Beard  added  over  repair. ) 
Foreigners  from  Abu  Simbel. 

Beit  Hanina  four  miles  north  of  Jerusalem  {Racial  Types,  VII,  36, 17).  Altogether 
these  two  heads,  9  and  10,  may  be  taken  as  the  settled  Shasu  of  the  eastern  side, 
anywhere  between  Damascus  and  Judaea. 

No.  1 1  is  most  like  the  South  Syrian  in  the  less  full  growth  of  hair  and  slighter 
face,  see  the  Innuaa  {Racial  Types,  X,  81A),  Yanoah,  now  Yanuh,  six  miles  east 
of  Tyre,  and  a  South  Syrian,  Racial  Types,  IX,  35. 

Thus  these  ten  figures  begin  with  the  Armenian  of  the  North,  and  then  belong 
to  the  Galilee  region  North  and  South. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(       62       ) 


SOME   FRESH    INSCRIPTIONS. 

In  the  magnificent  collections  of  Sir  Frederick  Cook  at  Richmond  there  are  several 
Egyptian  objects,  and  by  his  kind  permission  I  now  publish  two  of  the  inscriptions. 
There  is  no  provenance  for  either  of  them  ;  they  were  bought  more  than  forty  years 
ago  by  the  late  Sir  Francis  Cook. 

I.  False  door  of  Ni-kau-Ptah.     Limestone,  height  56  in.,  width  41  in. 

Panel. — Ni-kau-Ptah  wearing  pleated  loin-cloth,  facing  to  right,  seated  before 
a  table  of  offerings  on  which  are  the  usual  upright  leaves.  Between  Ni-kau-Ptah 
and  the  table,  the  hieroglyphs  "  Bread,  a  thousand,"  on  the  other  side  of  the  table, 
"  Beer,  a  thousand."  A  standing  figure  facing  to  the  left  holds  a  censer  in  the 
right  hand  and  lifts  the  cover  with  the  left.  Between  this  figure  and  the  table, 
"  Scribe  of  the  treasury,  Ptah-kha-f."  The  inscription  is  curiously  arranged.  At 
the  top  it  is  divided  above  the  table  of  offerings ;  the  part  to  the  left  reads  from 
right  to  left ;    that  to  the  right,  from   left  to  right.     The  inscription  behind  the 

standing  figure  is  so  arranged  as  to  bring  the  three  ^s.    in  line.     Above  the  seated 

figure:  (i)  "  The  Royal  Scribe  of  the  accounts  of  Pharaoh,  (2)  he  who  is  in  the 
two  Houses  of  Gold,  he  of  the  Purification-house,  (3  vertically)  Ni-kau-Ptah." 
Above  the  standing  figure  two  horizontal  lines  of  inscription  :  (i)  "  By  his  brother 
of  eternity.  (2)  He  sacrifices.  Behold  him."  Behind  the  standing  figure : 
(i)  "A  burial  (2)  in  the  beautiful  West  (3)  among  the  worthy  ones." 

Lintel. — A  single  line  of  hieroglyphs,  reading  from  right  to  left :  "  May  the 
king  give  an  offering  and  Anubis  who  is  in  the  Shrine  of  the  God.  A  burial,  in  the 
necropolis  of  him  who  is  worthy  before  the  great  God." 

Leftside,  inner  jamb. — Two  vertical  lines  of  inscription,  below  which  is  the 
standing  figure  of  Ni-kau-Ptah,  holding  a  long  staff  in  his  left  hand,  a  folded  cloth 
in  his  right,  and  with  his  name  inscribed  horizontally  above  him.  The  inscriptions 
read  from  right  to  left : — (i)  "  Follower  of  the  treasury,  priest  of  King  Sahu-Ra, 
(2)  priest  of  the  Ra-em-sep  obelisk,  king's  uab-priest,  (3)  Ni-kau-Ptah." 

Left  side,  outer  jamb. — One  vertical  line  of  hieroglyphs.  "  The  instructor-scribe 
of  the  treasury,  favoured  of  the  king."  A  second  line  was  obviously  intended  as 
the  name  has  been  begun  both  top  and  bottom,  and  was  to  have  been  carried 
horizontally  across  both  lines.  The  sculptor  has  managed  to  achieve  the  "  Ptah  " 
only,  and  the  second  line  is  left  blank  as  well  as  the  remainder  of  the  name. 

Right  side,  outer  jamb. — Two  vertical  lines  of  inscription,  reading  from  left  to 
right:  (i)  "Oracular  priest  of  the  Rekhyt-bird  .  .  .  Overseer  of  the  treasury, 
(2)  .  .  .  .  offerings  (?)  and  fatlings,  [sealbearer  ?]  of  the  king  of  Lower  Egypt." 
The  inner  jamb  is  uninscribed,  and  the  drum  also. 

The  style  of  the  inscriptions  and  figures  dates  this  piece  to  the  Vlth  dynasty. 
The  provenance  is  probably  either  Saqqara  or  Abusir,  for  Ni-kau-Ptah  not  only 
bears  the  name  of  the  god  of  Memphis,  but  is  also  the  priest  of  the  Ra-em-sep 
obelisk  and  of  King  Sahu-Ra.  The  king  was  buried  in  one  of  the  pyramids  of 
Abusir  ;  and  the  obelisk  is  one  of  the  four  obelisks  the  names  of  whose  priests  are 
found  in  the  tombs  of  Saqqara.     The  site  of  one  of  these  obelisks  was  at  Abusir. 


Some  Fresh  Inscriptions. 


63 


'■ 


■4k 


False  Door  of  Ni-kau-Ptah. 


64  Some  Fresh  Inscriptions. 

The  early  form  of  the  obelisk  is  worth  noting :  the  wide  base  rises  from  a  low 
square  platform,  the  pillar  itself  is  short,  very  little  taller  than  the  base,  and  is 
surmounted  by  a  circular  disk.  This  disk  was  probably  of  polished  metal — gold  or 
copper — fastened  into  a  slot  in  the  top  of  the  obelisk. 

The  titles  are  interesting,  though  there  is  nothing  unusual.  Ni-kau-Ptah  held 
three  offices  in  the  Per-hez  or  treasury,  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  whether  he 
held  them  contemporaneously  or  consecutively.     I  incline  to  the  belief  that  they 

were  held  consecutively,  first  the    '  |  [jg  i:td>  then  the  ^\  (+] ,  and  finally  the 

^\  <::z>cr3.   The  cult  of  King  Sahu-Ra  continued  till  Ptolemaic  times,  though 

naturally  most  of  the  priesthoods  are  found  in  the  Old  Kingdom. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  upper  part  of  the  right  outer  jamb  is  too  much 

destroyed  to  be  legible.     The  first  title  appears  to  be  the  fairly  common  one,  ^^  11 

medu  rekhyt.     This  has  been  translated  "  Staff  of  the  people,"  which  though  literal 

conveys  little  meaning.     The  sign  II  when  it  occurs  in  titles,  at  least  in  the  Old 

Kingdom,  is  associated  with  the  name  of  an  animal-god,  Apis  and  Ka-hez  the 

White  Bull,  who  is  possibly  Mnevis.     The  word  \    medu  means  "  speech,  word," 

and  when  applied  to  a  person  would  mean  "  Speaker."  The  animal-gods,  especially 
Apis,  were  essentially  oracular,  and  as  the  oracles  were  always  interpreted  by  the 

priests,  the  title,  jl  fi  "^  5^'  '^^^  reasonably  be  translated  as  "  Speaker  [?>.,  inter- 
preter of  oracles,  or  oracular  priest]  of  Apis."  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the 
crested  plover  was  at  one  time  a  sacred  or  even  divine  animal.  On  the  great  mace- 
head  of  the  Scorpion  king  there  is  represented  a  row  of  standards  from  each  of 
which  a  rekhyt-bird  is  suspended  by  the  neck  {Hierak.  I,  PI.  XXV Ic,  i).  Frazer 
points  out  {^Ad.  Att.  Os.  I,  14^),  228,  ed.  1914),  that  in  some  parts  of  the  Near  East 
the  sacred  animal  or  incarnate  god  was  sacrificed  by  hanging  on  a  pole  ;  this  was 
especially  the  case  with  birds.  If  then  we  see  in  this  bird  a  primitive  deity,  the 
title  will  read  "  Oracular  priest  of  the  plover-god." 

The  name  Ni-kau-Ptah,  "  Belonging  to  the  kas  of  Ptah,"  is  not  very  common. 
I  have  three  references  to  it  {Names  and  Titles  of  the  Old  Kingdom),  two  from 
Saqqara  and  one   from    the  Wady  Hammamat.     In  the  tomb  of  Ptah-uash  at 

Saqqara  (Mariette,  Mastabas,  D.  38),  there  is  a      \ ,  who  holds  the  titles 

1  m  8  il\  1  >  ^nd  therefore  cannot  be  the  same  as  the  owner  of  this  false  door ;  the 
other  two  have  no  titles.  The  name  Ptah-kha-f,  "  Ptah  is  he  who  appears,"  is  rare. 
I  know  it  only  as  the  name  of  a  bearer  of  offerings  in  the  tomb  of  Ptah-shepses  I 
at  Saqqara  (Murray,  Saqqara  Mastabas,  I,  Pi.  XXVII),  whose  only  title  M '0' 
refers  to  his  temporary  position  in  the  funeral  ceremonies. 

II.  Round  topped  stele.     Limestone,  height  22  in.,  width  17  in. 

Obverse. — On  left,  a  goddess  in  a  tree,  facing  right,  giving  food  and  water  to 
a  man  and  woman  who  kneel  before  her.  The  tree  has  horizontal  bands  round  the 
stem,  and  stands  in  the  cup-shaped  depression  in  which  all  large  and  important 
trees  are  represented  ;  this  depression  was  for  holding  the  water  when  the  tree  was 
watered.  The  two  balls  probably  represent  stones,  which  protected  the  roots  and 
at  the  same  time  allowed  the  water  to  percolate  through.     The  goddess  wears  the 


Some  Fresh  Inscriptions. 


65 


name  of  Isis  on  her  head,  and  holds  in  her  left  hand  a' tray  of  food  and  in  her 
right  a  vase  from  which  pour  four  streams  of  water  ;  two  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
man,  while  two  pass  over  his  head  into  the  hands  of  the  woman  behind.  The  man 
kneels  on  the  lef^  knee ;  he  is  clad  in  a  skirt-like  garment  fastened  at  the  waist  > 


Stele  of  Tehuti-hetep  and  Kayay. 

he  wears  necklace,  bracelets  and  armlets  ;  and  his  wig,  short  at  the  back,  falls  in 
a  lappet  in  front  to  his  breast.  The  woman  kneels  on  both  knees  ;  she  is  clothed 
from  head  to  foot  in  a  long  cloak,  worn  over  a  close-fitting  dress  with  short,  pleated, 
bell-shaped  sleeves,  her  wig  falls  almost  to  her  waist,  both  back  and  front ;  she 

E 


66  Some  Fresh  Inscriptions. 

wears  no  ornaments.  Behind  her  is  a  small,  standing,  figure  of  a  man  with  a  shaven 
head,  dressed  in  a  long-skirted  garment ;  he  carries  a  papyrus-stem  in  the  left  hand, 
and  raises  the  right  in  adoration.  Round  the  top  above  the  figures  are  seven 
vertical  lines  of  inscription  :  (i)  [Above  the  goddess]  "  Hathor,  Lady  of  the  West. 
(2)  Chapter  of  drinking  water  (3)  by  the  Chief  of  the  Masha-  (4)  kabu,  (s)  Tehuti- 
hetep,  true  of  voice.  (6)  The  Lady  of  the  House,  Ka-(7)  yay,  true  of  voice.  His 
son  ....  -hes." 

Behind  the  tree  is  one  vertical  line  of  inscription  :  "  She  gives  water  as  is  right." 

Below  the  scene  are  four  horizontal  lines  of  inscription  :  (i)  "May  the  king 
give  an  offering,  and  Osiris,  Horus,  and  Isis,  may  they  give  bread  and  beer,  air, 
water,  incense,  (2)  and  all  things  good  and  pure,  coming  forth  before  them ;  for  the 
ka  of  the  only  excellent  one,  the  regulator  (3)  of  the  embassies  of  the  king  to  all 
foreign  countries,  he  who  belongs  to  the  two  feet  of  his  god,  he  who  enters  (?)  to  his 
lord,  he  who  is  beautiful  (?)  before  him  ;  the  Chief  of  the  Ma-(4)  shakabu,  Tehuti- 
hetep,  true  of  voice,  belonging  to  the  Rowers  of  Rameses,  beloved  of  Sekhmet." 

Reverse. — Osiris,  enthroned,  facing  to  right ;  behind  him,  the  emblem  of  the 
West ;  in  front  a  table  of  offerings  piled  with  cakes  and  surmounted  by  a  bull's  head 
and  haunch.  Under  the  table  to  the  left  is  a  vase  on  a  stand,  with  a  lotus  twined 
round  it.  Facing  the  god  are  a  man  and  woman  standing.  The  man  is  dressed 
in  a  long-skirted  garment,  he  wears  a  short  beard,  and  his  wig  falls  to  the  breast  in 
front,  to  the  shoulder-blades  behind ;  his  right  hand  is  raised  in  adoration,  and  in 
the  left  he  carries  a  sheaf  of  flowers.  The  woman  wears  a  long,  plain,  cloak  opening 
over  a  pleated  robe  with  short,  pleated,  sleeves  ;  her  wig  falls  to  the  waist,  back  and 
front,  and  her  head  is  adorned  with  a  cone  and  a  lotus-blossom.  Round  the  top, 
above  the  figures,  are  eight  vertical  lines  of  inscription  :  (i)  "  Osiris,  lord  of  Abydos. 
(2)  May  the  king  give  an  offering,  and  Osiris,  may  he  give  bread  and  beer,  (3)  cool 
water  and  incense,  for  the  Chief  (4)  of  the  Mashak-  (5)  abu,  Tehuti-  (6)  hetep,  true  of 
voice.     (7)  The  Lady  of  the  House,  Ka-  (8)  yay,  true  of  voice." 

Below  are  three  horizontal  lines  of  inscription:  (i)  "May  the  king  give  an 
offering,  and  Osiris,  Ruler  of  the  Two  Lands,  may  he  grant  to  me  that  I  may 
enter  among  the  souls  ex-  (2)  cellent  and  all  the  gods  around  him,  that  my  offerings 
be  increased  before  me,  [for]  I  am  he  who  is  alone  (3)  among  them.  For  the 
ka  of  the  Chief  of  the  Mashakabu,  Tehuti-hetep,  true  of  voice,  belonging 
to  the  Rowers  of  Merenptah,  beloved  of  Sekhmet"  j^,^^ 

Sides. — Down  each  side,  i.e.,  on  the  thickness  of  the  stone,  is  a  vertical 


line  of  inscription  :  "The  Osiris,  the  Chief  of  the  Mashakabu,  Tehuti-hetep, 

true  of  voice."  '■ 

On  the  side  to  the  left  of  the  obverse,  Tehuti-hetep's  name  is  written  ♦  ♦  • 

with  the  moon-crowned  ape ;  on  the  other  side,  it  is  written  with  the  ibis  '^^^ 
on  a  perch.     The  same  variation  in  writing  occurs  in  the  other  inscriptions 
on  the  stele. 

The  name  Tehuti-hetep  is  rare,  the  usual  compound  with  Tehuti  being  f]  ^ 

vies.     The  name  Kayay  is  not  uncommon,  it  is  found  as  Kayuy  and   is  J 

spelt  in  various  ways,  as  is  often  the  case  when  several  weak  letters  come  ''^^ 

together  ;  one  of  the  most  usual  forms  is  ^3^  ^  (1.  "^ 

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Alan  Gardiner  for  calling  my  attention  to  the         / 

occurrence  of  the  word  ^^^  \s\s\  *^ ^^^^  *^  J  n.        elsewhere,  and  for  ^ 

giving  me  the  following  references  :  Tomb  of  Nebnefer  at  Deir  el-Medinet  nJr  9 


Some  Fresh  Inscriptions.  67 

(mentioned  also  in  Gardiner  and  Weigall,  TopograpJiical  Catalogtie  of  Theban  Tombs) ; 
Pap.  Leiden  350,  Verso  III,  3;  British  Museum  1183  (new  701).  Burchardt 
(Altkanaanischen   Fremdworte    513)    translates    the    word    Aufseher,   "Overseer, 


Stei.e  of  Tehuii-hetef  and  Kayay. 


surveyor,"  and  gives  references  to  Pap.  Bulak  12,  6,  and  Harris  28,  5.  Nebnefer's 
tomb  is  absolutely  dated  to  the  reign  of  Rameses  II,  and  the  other  occurrences 
of  the  word  are  also  of  the  middle  and  late  New  Kingdom. 

E   2 


68  So>ne  Fresh  Inscriptions. 

Tehuti-hetep  holds  the  interesting  title  of  mti  upt  ni-sut  er  khast  neb,  "  Regulator 
of  the  king's  embassies  to  all  foreign  countries."  This,  taken  in  connection  with  his 
principal  title,  Chief  of  the  Mashakabu,  suggests  that  he  had  strong  foreign 
connections.  The  epithet  "  Belonging  to  the  feet  of  his  god  "  is  not  very  common, 
the  more  usual  form  is  "  Belonging  to  the  feet  of  his  lord."  For  the  next  two 
epithets  I  can  find  no  other  examples.  K/ten  as  a  verb  means  "  to  go  in,  to  enter," 
but  is  usually  determined  by  the  walking  legs.  The  title  of  "  Rower"  of  the  king 
appears  to  indicate  an  important  office,  as  it  is  found  on  both  sides  of  the  stele 
immediately  after  the  name  of  Tehuti-hetep  in  a  very  conspicuous  position.  The 
king's  names  are  not  in  cartouches. 

The  names  of  Rameses  and  Merenptah  give  the  date  of  the  stele  as  the  latter 
half  of  the  XI  Xth  dynasty;  and  the  mention  of  the  goddess  Sekhmet  suggests 
Memphis  or  Thebes  as  the  place  from  which  it  came. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


(    69    ) 


FRENCH   EGYPTOLOGY   DURING    1916. 

In  the  Comptes  Rendus  of  the  Acad^mie  des  Inscriptions  for  April,  1916, 
M.  Seymour  de  Rice!  edits  a  Greek  inscription  which  has  been  stored  in  three 
pieces  in  the  Alexandria  Museum  for  some  years.  The  third  of  these  fragments 
had  remained  unpublished,  and  it  is  by  means  of  it  that  much  of  the  text  can  now 
be  restored. 

The  inscription  is  an  extract  from  the  official  records  of  the  Idiologus  of 
Alexandria  for  the  27th  of  Thoth,  of  the  fifth  year  of  Hadrian,  A.D.  I20.  It 
concerns  the  trial  of  one  Ulpius  Potamai — who  appears  to  have  been  a  freedman 
of  Trajan — and  a  troop  of  guards  of  the  necropolis  who,  according  to  M.  de  Ricci's 
restoration  of  the  letters,  were  Lycians.  Their  corps  was  called  a  polileunia,  or  a 
municipal  brigade,  a  word  used  for  a  body  of  Cretans  in  the  Tebtunis  Papyrus 
No.  32. 

The  inscription,  which  was  probably  set  up  as  a  warning  to  others,  sets  forth 
that  the  Comogrammateus  of  Mareotis  had  ordered  Potamai  and  his  guards  to  be 
tried  for  neglect  of  their  duty  in  safeguarding  the  cemeteries.  The  punishment 
awarded  them  does  not  appear,  owing  to  the  text  being  broken  away. 

In  a  communication  to  the  French  Academy,  M.  A.  Moret  has  been  explaining 
a  rare  term  used  in  several  of  the  decrees  found  by  MM.  Adolphe  Reinach  and 

Weill  at  Coptos.  His  essay  concerns  the  correct  meaning  of  the  sign  ^,  as  a 
description  of  one  of  the  functions  of  the  meritou,  or  workmen,  of  the  IVth 
dynasty  era. 

He  reaches  his  result  by  showing  from  a  text  that  ^  may  be  rendered  also 
by  £j,  and  that  both  mean  four,  the  kiln  or  furnace  of  a  pottery.  The  sign  ^ 
therefore  qualifies  an  artisan  as  a  potter. 

The  whole  of  Vol.  XX  of  the  Sphinx  of  Upsala  is  occupied  by  a  transcrip- 
tion and  translation  of  the  Harris  Magic  Papyrus  by  Ernst  Akmar  (formerly 
Ernst  Andersson).  He  reviews  the  rendering  of  this  hieratic  text  into  hieroglyphs 
by  Chabas  and  Budge,  and  gives  his  own  hieroglyphic  version  in  45  pages  of 
12  lines  each.  Then  in  some  40  pages  M.  Akmar  adds  the  reasons  for  his 
differing  from  the  transcription  of  the  hieratic,  and  consequent  translation  by 
Dr.  Budge,  in  the  Facsimiles  of  Hieratic  Papyri,  1910:  "The  Beautiful  Chapters 
of  the  Songs  which  drive  away  him  that  is  submerged."  The  changes — many  of 
them  of  minor  importance  for  comprehending  the  general  ideas  expressed  in  the 
text — are  very  useful  for  all  students  of  the  hieratic  script,  and  apply  to  quite  half 
the  lines  of  the  manuscript.  To  comment  upon  the  emendations  of  M.  Akmar  here 
would  need  much  space  and  be  difficult  to  follow  without  printing  a  facsimile  of 
the  papyrus.  The  difficult  passage  speaking,  according  to  Dr.  Budge,  of  the 
Crocodile  Mako  being  "  bound  fast  with  four  fetters  (made  of)  Metal  of  the 
South  " — for  the  real  meaning  of  which  harpoons  had  been  suggested — M.  Akmar 
renders  "  bound  to  the  four  pillars  of  greenstone  of  the  South,  which  are  on  the  bow 

E  3 


70  French  Egyptology. 

of  the  Ship  of  Ra."     If  he  is  correct,  this  is  one  of  the  chief  changes  he  makes  in 
the  wording  of  this  singularly  useless  series  of  chants  or  incantations. 

The  second  fascicule  of  Vol.  XII  of  the  Bulletin  de  finslitut  Franqais 
d'Arc/teologie  Orientale  is  almost  entirely  occupied  by  M.  Georges  Daressy  and 
Mr.  F.  W.  Read  upon  the  Palermo  Stele  :  apropos  of  M.  Gauthier's  publication  of 
the  fragments  at  Cairo  in  the  Musce  Egyptien,  Tome  III.  [A  discussion  of  this 
appeared  in  ANCIENT  Egvi'T,  1916,  pp.  182-1S4.]  Mr.  Read,  in  his  remarks,  gives 
good  reasons  for  considering  that  we  now  have  pieces  of  three  copies  of  this  early 
text. 

M.  Daressy's  essay,  which  extends  to  more  than  50  pages,  is  the  first 
publication  to  utilise  fully  M.  Gauthier's  edition  of  the  Cairo  Museum  fragments 
for  restoring  the  regnal  successions  and  chronology  of  the  first  four,  and  part  of 
the  fifth,  dynasties  after  Menes.  He  provides  elaborate  tables  in  which  he  first 
gives  his  views  based  upon  the  new  evidence  of  the  list  of  Pharaohs  for  the  first 
three  dynasties,  as  now  disclosed  by  the  additions  we  have  to  the  Palermo  Stele 
inscriptions.  He  then  discusses  all  the  information  given  by  these  texts,  comparing 
it  with  the  Turin  Papyrus  List  of  Kings,  those  of  the  texts  at  Abydos  and  Sakkara, 
and  Manetho  and  Eratosthenes.  Then  two  special  tables  are  devoted  to  the  fourth 
and  fifth  dynasties,  another  to  the  pre-Menite  kings,  and,  finally,  he  discusses  the 
Horus-titles  of  monarchs  of  the  first  three  dynasties.  M.  Daressy  concludes  by 
saying :  "  It  is  only  some  twenty  years  ago  that  the  three  first  dynasties  were 
considered  as  legendary.  Discoveries  made  since  then  have  demonstrated  that 
they  certainly  existed,  and  have  left  us  monuments.  Thanks  to  the  Stone  of 
Palermo,  we  are  now  able  to  control  the  Pharaonic  lists  and  the  Greek  classics." 

It  is  pleasing  to  note  the  entrance  of  a  British  Egyptologist  into  the  pages 
of  the  Bulletin  of  the  Ecole  Fran^aise  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Read.  His  article  is 
more  confined  to  a  review  of  M.  Gauthier's  paper  in  the  Musee  Egyptien  and  the 
heliogravures  of  the  Cairo  fragments  there  provided.     Mr.  Read  suggests  that  the 

sign    1  in  line  6  of  the  largest  of  the  new  pieces,  which  is  followed  by  a  lacune 
and  then  M   should  be  restored  by  the  hieroglyphs    I  T  ^^,  as  we  knew  from  the 

old  stele  that  these  Annals  occurred  at  that  position,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  case. 

He  also  points  out  the  great  importance  of  the  new  fragments,  proving  that 
in  the  complete  inscription  for  the  pre-dynastic  kings  there  was  not  only  a  row 
wearing  only  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt,  but  also  a  series  wearing  that  of  Upper 
Egypt.  Because,  although  we  knew  that  the  stele  at  Palermo  had  a  series  of 
pre-Menites  wearing  only  the  lower  Egyptian  crown,  that  did  not  prove  it  intended 
to  represent  them  as  ruling  over  Lower  Egypt  only ;  because  Pharaohs  we  know, 
who  governed  the  whole  country,  are  often  shown  with  only  the  single  crown. 
Now,  we  see  that  there  were  on  the  stele  two  rows  of  kings,  one  wearing  the 
crowH  of  Lower  and  the  other  that  of  Upper  Egypt ;  it  gives  strong  reasons  for 
thinking  that  it  was  intended  to  indicate  pre-Menite  sovereigns  who  reigned  over 
Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  respectively. 

M.  Etienne  Combe  edits  eleven  Arabic  funerary  epitaphs  dating  from  before 
the  Tulum  dynasty,  mostly  merely  citations  from  the  Koran.  Some  curious 
Saracenic  sculptural  decorations  are  illustrated  from  Dr.  Fouquet's  collection. 

M.  Henri  Munier  treats  of  some  Coptic  manuscripts  of  the  Old  and  the  New 
Testaments.     These,  as  a  rule,  are  not  of  high  value  for  textual  criticism,  because 


French  Egyptology.  71 

one  is  never  sure  that  divergences  from  the  textus  receptus  are  not  due  to  scribal 
carelessness.  One  of  the  manuscripts  in  this  case,  which,  among  other  texts,  gives 
part  of  Genesis  xxxvi,  is  of  importance.  The  scribe,  or  the  writer  this  scribe 
was  copying,  a|3pears  to  have  been  a  learned  man.  The  twenty  odd  verses  of 
Genesis  xxxvi  contain  chiefly  a  long  list  of  names,  particularly  interesting  because 
duplicated,  with  variations,  in  i  Chronicles.  The  Coptic  titles  as  a  rule  agree 
closely  with  those  in  the  Codex  Alexandrinus,  but  where  that  does  not  very  nearly 
transmit  the  original  Hebrew  form,  the  Coptic  scribe  in  his  text  endeavours  to 
do  so. 

Several  of  these  tribal  names  also  appear  upon    Egyptian    Monuments   or 
papyri,  such  as  Lotan,  Hor  and  Aiah. 


The  first  fascicule  of  Vol.  XIII,  that  for  1916,  of  the  Bulletin  contains  what  is 
practically  a  complete  treatise  upon  the  "  Logement  et  Transport  des  Barques 
Sacr^es  et  des  Statues  de  Dieux  dans  quelques  Temples  Egyptiens,"  by  M.  Legrain. 
He  commences  by  giving  a  technical  description  of  the  construction  of  the  litter 
or  platform  upon  which  the  priestly  porters  carried  the  sacred  boats  of  the  various 
temples.  The  number  of  the  supporting  poles  or  bars  varied  according  to  the 
periods  of  Egyptian  history,  and  to  the  deity  whose  shrine  they  bore.  The  bearers 
were  all  strictly  arranged  according  to  precedent,  certain  members  of  the  hierarchy 
being  assigned  to  a  definite  place.  The  carriers  of  Amon's  sacred  barque  at  Karnak 
numbered  thirty.  They  were  all  priestly  duplicates  of  deities :  fifteen  of  them  of 
the  "  Paout  of  the  great  gods,  the  Spirits  of  Pa,"  and  the  same  number  of  the 
"  Paout  of  the  lesser  gods,  the  Spirits  of  Nekhen."  They  thus  symbolised  the 
rows  of  these  deities  found  displayed  in  vignettes  in  the  illustrated  funerary  papyri. 
Where  these  deities  had  animal  heads,  the  representative  priestly  bearers  are  shown 
wearing  masks  and  headdresses  to  symbolise  the  divine  type.  These  gods  them- 
selves are  represented  upon  the  sculptured  reliefs  or  paintings  upon  the  shrine  halls, 
where  the  sacred  barques  were  deposited.  The  arrangements  for  the  porterage  of 
the  barques  absolutely  illustrate  the  mythology  of  Egypt.  Thus,  at  first,  the 
Amon  shrine  litter  had  but  three  bars,  later  augmented  to  five,  with  six  bearers  to 
each  bar.  It  would  be  thought  that  the  increase  in  number  was  owing  to  the 
greater  magnificence  of  the  temple,  the  larger  size  of  the  boat-shrine  carrier  itself, 
with  its  greater  decorations  as  the  riches  of  the  temple  increased.  It  would  appear 
as  if  the  change  had  a  religious  origin,  because  the  earlier  Paouts  were  enneads, 
and  so  the  bearers  representative  of  each  were  restricted  to  nine.  M.  Legrain 
thinks  that  in  primitive  times  these  priest-gods  tugged  or  hauled  the  boat  containing 
the  god's  shrine  on  the  river,  or  upon  a  sleigh  to  convey  it  from  the  Nile  bank  into 
the  shrine,  before  the  idea  of  shouldering  the  litter  carrying  the  barque  became 
fashionable.  M.  Legrain  goes  on  to  describe  fully  the  dimensions  and  shape  of 
the  halls  wherein  the  litter  and  the  barque  were  placed  and  guarded,  and  the 
ceremony  of  their  deposition  therein. 

One  special  occasion  when  they  were  taken  out  in  procession  and  returned 
was  that  of  a  coronation.  He  gives  a  somewhat  full  account  of  this  function, 
and  compares  .some  of  the  ritual  with  that  at  Jerusalem  as  given  in  Kings  and 
Chronicles.  The  coincidences,  however,  appear  to  be  accidental,  or  only  such  as 
would  naturally  ari.sc  from  the  similarity  of  the  occurrence.  The  role  of  the  chief 
priest  and  of  a  priestess,  who  represented  temple  deities  at  all  goings  forth  of  the 
sacred  barques,  is  recounted,  as  far  as  they  can  be  restored  to  us,  by  the  reliefs  and 

E4 


72  French  Egyptology. 

inscriptions,  chiefly  those  at  Kamak,  where  M.  Legrain  has  resided  for  so  many 
years. 

In  the  second  part  of  his  memoir  he  describes  similar  ceremonies  at  many 
other  temples,  such  as  Luxor,  Qurnah,  Deirel-Bahri,  Medinet  Habu,  Edfu,  Dendereh, 
Esneh,  and  Kom  Ombo.  The  accounts  derivable  from  Ptolemaic  temples  are 
necessarily  of  late  date,  but,  doubtless,  strictly  in  accord  with  more  primitive 
practices.  This  story  of  the  sacred  barque  goes  back  to  the  most  archaic  period 
of  Egyptian  civilisation,  because  it  is  the  earliest  of  all  representations  of  the  cult 
of  the  gods,  as  shown  upon  the  most  primitive  pottery.  Thereon  we  see  the  boat 
with  its  shrine  for  the  deity  being  rowed  along  the  Nile,  the  totem  symbol  of 
the  god  upon  the  summit  of  a  mast,  and  the  populace  upon  the  river  banks 
acclaiming  the  boat's  passage. 

In  the  same  number  of  the  Bulletin  M.  G.  Daressy  again  takes  up  the  identity 
of  the  animal  shown  as  representative  of  the  god  Set,  his  interest  in  the  question 
having  arisen  from  Dr.  Schweinfurth  having  recently  suggested  it  is  the  Octeerops 
or  Ant-eating  "  Aardvaak "  of  South  Africa.  M.  Daressy  concludes  it  is  an 
imaginary  animal,  designed  to  depict  all  the  most  contrary  attributes  to  those  of  the 
boar  which  was  the  principal  form  of  the  Set-animal  in  the  earliest  times.  To 
support  this  view  he  gives  a  table  of  the  features  of  the  boar,  and  the  diametrically 
opposite  ones  of  the  Set-creature.  He  believes  the  basic  origin  of  the  conception 
was  to  design  a  fictitious  animal  so  physically  helpless  that  he  could  not  possibly 
injure  Horus.  It  will  be  remembered  how  much  some  of  the  Set-animal  figures 
resemble  a  jackal  (excepting  in  the  vertical  tail).  M.  Daressy  cites  a  singular 
passage  from  the  Harris  Magic  Papyrus :  "  The  boars,  to  worship  thee,  have 
assumed  the  bodies  of  jackals."  Set  once  governed  Upper  Egypt  and  appears  as 
totem  for  one,  if  not  more,  of  its  Pharaohs,  as  the  Set-animal ;  but  on  the  Palermo 
Stele  as  symbol  of  one  Pharaoh,  this  composite  creature  is  replaced  by  a  boar  as 
the  king's  nubti  symbol. 

M.  Daressy  does  not  include  the  Set  statuettes  in  his  study,  which  should  be 
done.  One  in  the  Hilton  Price  Collection  was  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology  about  sixteen  years  ago,  which  renders  the  head 
and  prehensile  snout — something  like  that  of  the  South  American  tapir — very 
realistically. 

The  remainder  of  the  Bulletin  is  taken  up  by  M.  Henri  Munier's  long  article 
upon  "  Une  Relation  Copte  Sahidique  de  la  Vie  de  Saints  Maxime  et  Domice." 
He  gives  the  whole  Coptic  text  with  translation  of  a  new-found  manuscript  from 
the  Hamouli  Monastery.  Whilst  deserving  full  praise  for  his  erudition  and  the 
time  and  labour  expended,  it  may  be  ventured  to  suggest  it  seems  a  pity  to  go  to 
so  much  expense  to  publish  such  a  worthless  production.  The  rubbish  of  the 
alleged  adventures  and  miracles  of  these  pseudo  saints  is  quite  unworthy  of  repro- 
duction. Moreover,  a  Bohairic  version  has  been  published  by  M.  Am^Iineau,  and 
Syriac  and  Arabic  recensions  are  known.  It  may  be  presumed  such  a  work  would 
not  be  composed  and  inscribed  unless  the  pious  would  purchase  and  peruse  it,  and 
therefore  it  throws  a  curious  light  upon  the  mentality  of  Egyptian  Christianity  at 
the  time  such  a  story  was  produced. 

In  the  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  1916,  pp.  175-200,  Prof  A.  L. 
Frothingham  publishes  an  article  entitled  "  Hermes,  Snake-God,  Caduceus,"  which 
will  be  of  value  for  the  tracing  back  to  an  Asiatic  ancestry  of  some  elements  of 


French  Egyptology.  73 

Hellenic  mythology.  The  greater  part  of  the  essay  is  devoted  to  proving  by 
reproduction  of  the  figures  upon  cyUnder-seals  and  other  relics  of  Mesopotamian 
and  Hittite  art,  the  origin  of  the  Caduceus  symbol  among  the  Babylonian,  Assyrian, 
and  Hittite  race*.  Also,  at  a  later  period,  of  the  Babylonian  deity  who  for  a  time 
embodied  the  ideas  connected  with  the  duplicate  serpents  which  formed  the 
Caduceus.  These  dual  serpents,  male  and  female,  were  undoubtedly  significant  of 
fecundity,  and  therefore  were  used  as  emblems  in  association  with  a  nude  goddess 
and  a  god  depicted  at  times  with  ithyphallic  character,  and  trees  and  plants 
emblematic  of  prolific  vegetation. 

The  basis  of  these  ideas  is  the  origin  of  life — as  illustrated  by  what 
Prof.  Frothingham  terms  the  connubium  of  these  two  deities,  representing  the 
vivifying  solar  heat — and  the  soil  and  moisture  and  their  union,  at  seedtime, 
producing  harvest.  The  deity,  the  animal,  and  the  vegetable  figures  in  the  groups 
exemplify  this,  especially  upon  a  fragment  of  Phoenician  pottery  found  in  Spain. 
For  the  ingenious  and  erudite  manner  in  which  the  matter  is  discussed  our  readers 
should  consult  the  article  referred  to.  It  is  alluded  to  here  because  Prof  Frothingham 
does  not  treat  upon  the  Egyptian  iconography  of  his  subject  of  the  Caduceus,  for 
this  same  symbol,  although  not  frequently  employed,  was  known  to,  and  depicted 
by,  the  ancient  Egyptians  from  very  early  times.  Whether  they  adopted  it  from 
Asiatic  sources,  or  it  was  a  symbol  of  concepts  evolved  by  the  Egyptians  themselves, 
we  cannot  yet  decide. 

The  representation  of  a  single  serpent,  or  of  two  separate  ones,  by  Egyptian 
artists  on  the  other  hand,  was  quite  common. 

An  early  example  of  combined  serpents  is  on  a  cylinder  of  the  Hyksos  king 
Khyan  of  the  XVth  dynasty,  which  is  preserved  in  the  Athens  Museum. 

Another  specimen  of  the  group  may  be  seen  in  the  Egyptian  Collection  at 
University  College,  London  ;  see  the  last  number,  p.  33. 

Prof  Frothingham  shows  a  Babylonian  group  of  a  deity  grasping  two  serpents, 
which  is  a  very  similar  attitude  to  that  of  Horus  in  the  scenes  wherein  that  deity  is 
depicted  standing  upon  crocodiles  and  holding  scorpions,  and  sometimes  animals 
as  well  as  snakes.  These  images  are  always  supposed,  however,  to  be  solely 
concerned  with  the  god's  protective  power  against  the  bites  of  animals  and  reptiles. 

In  the  recent  volume  of  the  Bulletin  Correspondance  Hellenique,  M.  Gustave  Blum 
has  an  article  upon  "  Princes  Hell^niques,"  which  concerns  the  portraiture  of  two 
of  the  Lagides :  Ptolemy  IV,  Philopator,  and  Ptolemy  VI,  Philometor.  It  is 
illustrated  by  admirable  photogravures  of  gems  and  coins,  and  provides  perfect 
representations  of  the  physiognomy  of  these  two  princes.  For  the  first,  the  finest 
portrait  is  that  upon  a  cameo  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles,  which  M.  Babelon 
published  as  a  figure  of  Harpocrates.  A  comparison  of  the  bust  depicted  on  the 
gem  with  a  coin  of  Philopator  preserved  at  The  Hague,  and  another  in  the  Lobbecke 
Collection,  leaves  no  doubt  but  that  all  three  represent  the  same  personage. 
Moreover,  the  head  upon  the  cameo  bears  the  double  crown  of  Upper  and  Lower 
Egypt.  The  face  is  youthful,  because  Philopator  ascended  the  throne  when  only 
twenty-two  years  of  age.  The  king's  portrait  being,  on  the  cameo,  so  Egyptianised 
as  to  be  considered  an  Harpocrates,  is  an  interesting  comment  upon  the  fact  that 
he  was  the  first  of  the  Ptolemies  to  be  crowned  at  Memphis  according  to  the  Ancient 
Egyptian  rites  for  such  a  royal  function. 

For  Ptolemy  Philometor  M.  Blum  produces  two  busts  upon  gold  rings  in  the 
Louvre  Collection.     One  of  these  shows  the  king  with  the  Egyptian  double  crown, 


74  French  Egyptology. 

the  other  with  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  of  a  Greek  Basileus.  M.  Blum  suggests 
that  these  two  intaglios,  which  were  found  together,  belonged  to  some  official  who 
used  them  as  signets  upon  the  same  occasions — the  Egyptianised  figure  for  sealing 
Demotic  documents,  and  the  Hellenic  one  for  that  of  their  duplicate  Greek 
counterparts.  The  phototypes  of  the  rings  are  placed  alongside  two  others  of 
Philometor's  coins  which  completely  justify  M.  Blum's  attribution.  The  face  of 
the  second  monarch  bears  very  slight  resemblance  to  that  of  his  ancestor  Philopator. 
For  other  Ptolemaic  portraits  see  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1916,  p.  95. 

In  M.  Dussaud's  new  Catalogue  of  Les  Monuments  Palestiniens  et  Judaiques 
in  the  Louvre,  he  gives  heliogravures  of  three  steles  from  Tel  el-Yahudiyeh,  in  the 
Delta,  bearing  Greek  epitaphs,  which  were  obtained  a  few  years  ago  by  M.  Seymour 
de  Ricci.     One  of  these  reads  : — 

"  In  the  year  7,  the  7th  of  Phamenoth,  Sabbataios,  son  of  Somoelos,  died, 
too  early,  age  about  25  years." 

This,  like  the  other  inscriptions,  is  a  record  of  a  Jew,  and  so  confirms  the 
existence  of  the  Jewish  colony  at  this  place.  Onion.  The  name  is  identical  with 
that  in  another  Jewish  epitaph  recently  recovered  near  Heliopolis.  It  is  a  title 
similar  to  that  of  personages  mentioned  in  Nehemiah  viii,  7,  Esdras  ix,  48,  and 
elsewhere,  but  it  also  is  to  be  found  concerning  a  member  of  the  citizens  of  Nippur, 
probably  a  Jew  in  the  time  of  Artaxerxes  or  Darius  II,  for  Prof.  Hilprecht, 
in  his  "  Business  Documents  of  Murashu  Sons,"  gives  a  name  written  in  cuneiform 
as  Sabbataai.  In  the  Tel  el-Yahudiyeh  text,  Samoelos  is  intended,  doubtless, 
for  Samouelos. 

Another  epitaph  is  of  "  Elazaros,  the  good,  beloved  of  all,  aged  30  years,  the 
2nd  year  of  Caesar,  20th  of  Mechir."     This  would  be  28  J5.C. 

The  third  text  is  of  a  "John,  son  of  John,"  and  is  undated.  The  Sabbataios 
year  is  almost  certainly  of  Augustus,  like  that  of  Elaazaros,  and  so  will  be  23  B.C. 

M.  Naville,  when  excavating  at  the  same  site,  found  inscriptions  of  Jewish 
residents.  In  one  of  these  the  person  was  named  Eleazar  ;  another  was  "  Mikkos, 
the  son  of  Nethaneus"  (Micah,  son  of  Nethaniah).  Other  names  were  Barchias 
and  Salamis,  or  Salome  Barchias.  Barachiah's  death  is  dated  in  the  35th  year 
which  could  only  apply  to  the  prolonged  reign  of  Augustus.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  among  the  Jews  presumably  dwelling  in  Egypt,  who  were  on  the 
Committee  of  the  Septuagint  translation,  two  were  named  Sabbataius  and  one 
Eleazar. 

The  Committee  for  the  Preservation  of  the  Arabic  Monuments  of  Egypt, 
which  is  closely  connected  also  with  the  administration  of  the  Arabic  Art  Museum 
in  the  Sharia  Mehemet  'AH  in  Cairo,  has  for  some  time  been  carrying  on  exca- 
vations in  some  of  the  large  mounds  behind  what  is  called  "  Old  Cairo."  These 
mounds  cover  the  remains  of  the  mediaeval  early  Mohammedan  town  of  Eostat, 
which  was  laid  out  on  a  town-planning  scheme  copying  the  arrangement  of  the 
tents  of  the  Amirs  and  Sheikhs  which  formed  the  great  camp  when  the  Arab 
invaders  besieged  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  Babylon. 

The  discoveries  of  pottery,  most  of  it  fragmentary,  have  been  very  considerable  ; 
also  a  number  of  funerary  Arabic  inscriptions  have  come  to  light,  but  not  any 
monuments  or  architectural  remains  of  importance.  The  finds  of  manuscripts, 
however,   have   been   very    numerous — papyri,   parchment    and   paper   being   all 


French  Egyptology.  75 

represented — and  some  two  thousand  pieces,  of  more  or  less  value,  have  already 
been  collected.  They  are  almost  all  of  the  age  of  the  Arabic  dominion,  and 
mostly  what  may  be  termed  domestic  documents,  such  as  reports  of  commissions 
for  transporting  agricultural  produce,  records  of  mercantile  transactions,  revenue 
disputes  and  such  like.  One  manuscript,  in  perfect  preservation,  concerns  the 
giving  of  freedom  to  a  slave.     This  is  of  the  eleventh  century. 

The  whole  Collection,  which  is  likely  to  be  much  augmented  in  the  immediate 
future,  will  be  stored  in  the  Museum  of  Arab  Art,  and  will  make  Cairo  to  be  a 
centre  for  studying  records  of  the  early  eras  of  the  Mohammedan  rule  in  Egypt. 

Joseph  Offord. 


(    76    ) 


JOURNALS. 


Recueil  de    Travaux   relatifs  a  la  Philologie  et  tArchdologie 
egyptiennes  et  assyriennes.     Vol.  XXXVII,  1916.     Liv.  3-4. 

[The  first  half  of  this  volume  was  noticed  in  Ancient  Egypt,  1915,  p.  183.] 

J£quier,  G. — La  tcte  de  panthere.     This  is  the  peh  hieroglyph  usually  called 
the  lion's  head.     In  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  king  takes  the  insignia  of  the  panther 

skin,  long  staff,  and  sceptre  aba.  The 
panther  skin  is  named  ba,  and  so  is  the 
panther  ba,  or  aby.  Among  the  variants 
of  this  name  the  head  occurs  as  a  hiero- 
glyph, showing  that  it  has  the  value  ba. 
The  long  neck  also  agrees  with  the  panther 
and  not  with  the  lion.  Among  the  offer- 
ings in  early  mastabas  is  ba  res,  along  with 
clothing ;  this  therefore  refers  to  the 
"  panther  of  the  South,"  well  known  in 
later  inscriptions.  The  author  does  not 
explain  how  and  when  the  value /^/s  arose. 
Nature  et  origine  du  dieu  Bes.  A 
general  opinion  that  Bes  was  a  leopard 
rests  on  an  error  of  reading  at  Beni  Hasan, 
where  ba  res  has  been  read  as  one  word, 
basil.  Pleyte  supposed  that  a  panther- 
headed  god  in  Chapter  CXLV  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  was  Bes,  but  there  is 
no  name  to  it,  and  thus  no  connection 
with  Bes.  The  figures  of  Bes  on  the  ivory 
wands  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  and  the 
furniture  of  the  Empire,  are  all  entirely 
human  except  the  head,  and  an  animal 
tail.  In  the  later  times  the  figures  became 
more  complex,  owing  to  the  symbols  of 
other  divinities  being  added,  such  as  the 
plumes  of  Onqet,  a  triangular  harp,  shield 
and  sword.  All  accord  with  Bes  being 
a  negro  dancer,  as  African  dances  are 
usually  with  arms  and  the  panther's  skin 
worn  by  the  greatest  warriors.  The  Metternich  Stele  and  other  instances  show 
that  the  head  of  Bes  is  a  mask,  placed  separately  over  the  head  of  Horus. 

Thouhis.     This  was  a  kind  of  protecting  genius,  known  by  appellations,  such 
as  Ta-urt,  the  great,  Rei-t,  Aft,  or  Sheput.     This  genius,  like  Bes,  had  no  regular 


Bes,  showing  Skin  worn  on  back, 

FASTENED   BY   GlRDLE. 


Wood. 


University  College. 


Journals.  yj 

worship  as  other  Egyptian  divinities  had,  and  this  peculiar  position  connects  the 
two.  The  figure,  though  based  on  the  hippopotamus  type,  is  not,  Iil<e  other  animal 
gods,  a  true  copy ;  the  head  is  not  true,  the  paws  are  leonine,  the  breasts  are  human, 
the  back  is  a  crocodile's.  As  Bes  is  a  dancer  in  animal  dress,  so  probably  Taurt  is 
similarl}'  a  woman  with  animal  attributes.  The  conclusion  is  that  they  were  not 
divinities,  but  magicians  in  animal  dresses  employed  in  ceremonies  for  the  benefit 
of  children.     Both  came  from  the  Upper  Nile  or  Central  Africa. 

A  propos  (Tun  tableau  funeraire.  On  one  of  the  Gebeleyn  sarcophagi  of  the 
Middle  Kingdom  is  a  scene  of  the  dead  man  lying  on  a  bier,  two  women  mourners, 
one  at  the  head  the  other  at  the  feet,  and  a  smaller  figure  of  a  woman  in  the  air, 
looking  toward,  and  parallel  to,  the  dead.  Steindorfif  looks  on  the  mourners  as  the 
usual  funeral  mourners.     Wiedemann  looks  on  the  upper  figure  of  a  woman  as  that 


Pottery  Couch  and  Figure. 
Early  XVIIIth  dynasty.     University  College. 

of  one  destined  to  be  buried  with  the  dead.  After  disposing  of  some  mistaken 
analogies,  the  author  turns  to  the  female  statuettes  often  found  in  graves  of  the 
Xllth-XVIIIth  dynasties.  He  states  that  they  have  nothing  Egyptian,  at  least  in 
their  origin.  There  are  two  classes  of  these  figures,  one  rudely  made  in  pottery, 
with  very  long  limbs,  evidently  not  Egyptian,  and  the  other,  in  limestone, -well 
proportioned,  but  with  legs  ending  at  the  knees.  The  latter  are  attributed  to  the 
Empire.  There  is  also  another  category,  not  mentioned  by  M.  J(5quier,  of  finely 
made  red  pottery  figures  of  the  thin  graceful  type,  full  length,  and  associated  with 
double  couches  in  pottery,  manifestly  as  wives  of  the  dead.  These  are  of  the 
XVIIth-XVIIIth  dynasties.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  second  category 
above  is  found  certainly  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  made  in  blue  pottery  and  in  wood. 


78  Journals. 

The  source  of  figures  described  by  M.  Jdquier  is  distinguished  by  him  from  the 
Babylonian  mother-goddess  figures,  and  they  are  unhke  the  Greek  island  figures. 
He  suggests  therefore  Syria  as  a  source  for  the  idea.  He  discusses  the  analogy  to 
the  Saite  figures  of  a  female  on  a  couch,  but  considers  that  the  resemblance  may  be 
accidental.  Some  of  the  earliest  class,  the  rude  grey  pottery  figures,  have  an  infant 
on  the  back.  He  concludes  that  as  these  figures  are  foreign  and  have  no  place  in 
the  ritual,  therefore  there  is  no  ground  for  comparing  them  with  the  representation 
from  Gebeleyn.  He  then  connects  that  scene  with  the  figure  of  the  ba  hovering 
over  the  mummy  ;  and  the  two  mourners  with  those  who  personified  Bes  and 
Nebhat.  The  only  difficulty  is  that  the  figure  is  feminine  over  a  bearded  mummy, 
while  the  ba  is  always  masculine. 

With  regard  to  the  pottery  figures  they  may  very  well  originate  in  Syria  as 
M.  Jequier  suggests.  They  certainly  are  as  early  as  the  XHth  dynasty,  and  the 
fall  of  the  Vlth  dynasty  was  associated  with  a  Syro-Mesopotamian  invasion.  The 
use  of  soul-houses,  with  slave  figures  and  furniture,  also  belongs  to  the  same  age, 
and  is  analogous  to  the  pottery  figures  for  the  dead. 

Lacau,  p. —  Textes  Religieux.  This  is  an  arrangement  in  parallel  lines  of  the 
texts  of  four  sarcophagi  from  El-Bersheh,  principally  of  value  for  research  in 
equivalent  signs  and  readings. 

Maspero,  G. —  Utie  transcription  en  .  .  .  j/Si/o?  du  nom  de  0.     The  ren- 

dering  of  the  god  v\       _2^  by  Mai^SoOXt?  points  to  Osymandyas  being  a  real 

equivalent  to  User-ma-ra,  <:::=>  becoming  vZ  in  certain  cases  in  Upper  Egypt. 

Maspero,  G. — Introduction  a  Fetude  de  la  pho7ietique  Egyptienne.  This  paper 
of  S  5  pages  is  part  of  the  foundation  of  a  wide  grammatical  study  of  the  Egyptian 
language,  which  would  have  been  one  of  the  greatest  works  of  this  master.  How 
far  it  may  have  been  written  is  not  yet  known.  We  hope  everything  available  will  be 
given  to  the  public.  As  a  study  by  the  most  sympathetic  interpreter  of  Egyptian 
ideas,  singularly  free  from  theory,  it  would  probably  reach  nearer  to  the  usages, 
varying  in  time  and  region  and  gradually  unifying  into  rules,  than  any  positive 
system.  In  every  way  it  was  needed  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  self-sufficient, 
mechanical,  ultra- Semitic  school  of  Berlin.  In  the  Introduction  the  master  says, 
that  although  much  has  been  published  on  grammar  in  France,  England,  Italy  and 
Germany,  "  I  think  that  we  do  not  yet  know  enough  to  succeed,"  so  he  will  only 
write  an  Introduction  to  the  study  of  the  grammar.  "  We  have  had  the  chance  to 
find  a  clear  field  as  to  language  at  the  beginning  of  our  science,  and  we  have 
attacked  the  decipherment  without  the  encumbrance  of  preconceived  theories  or 
established  paradigms ;  shall  we  not  better  profit  by  the  absolute  liberty  with  which 
fortune  has  favoured  us,  by  creating  a  grammar  of  Egyptian  which  will  not  be 
inspired  solely  by  classical  models,  or  Indo-European,  or  Semitic,  but  which  springs 
entirely  from  an  analysis  of  the  texts,  aided  by  all  the  means  that  philology  can 
lend  us,  to  whatever  kind  of  language  it  is  applied?" 

The  historical  scope  of  the  enquiry  is  limited  to  the  period  from  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty  to  the  present  time.  [This  no  doubt  will  be  anathema  to  those  who  join 
their  conclusions  entirely  to  the  theoretic  beginnings  shown  by  the  most  primitive 
texts.  We  must  avoid  a  confusion  of  ideas.  Will  future  students  of  English  deal 
best  with  our  literature  by  insisting  on  the  earliest  Teutonic  or  Gothic  values  applied 


I 


Journals.  79 

to  our  present  writings,  or  by  beginning   with  the  Elizabethan?  The  primitive 

stages  of  a  language  are  of  the  utmost  value  ;  but  they  are  quite  unfit  to  be  the 

arbitrary  standard  for  its  developed  style.]  The  order  in  which  the  sounds  are 
studied  is  labial*^  dentals,  gutturals,  and  sibilants. 

D,!:^.   At  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  this  is   both  /   and  ///,    and   by   Saite 

examples  it  was  probably/  in  South,  and  also  in  North  when  unaccentuated,  but 
otherwise  ph.  Under  Arab  influence  it  has  become  b  in  Southern  Coptic,  but 
remains///  in  the  North. 

In  the  geographical  lists,  from  the  XVIIIth-XXIInd  dynasties,  it  is  equal  to 
the  Hebrew  pe.  In  some  cases  as  in  kafr,  the  pe  is  rendered  ''w-^  ,  although 
the /«  usually  is  rendered///  in  translation.  In  cuneiform  from  the  XVIIIth  to 
XXVth  dynasties  it  is  always  equal  to/. 

The  Greek  values  give  some  light  on  the  varying  values.  At  Memphis, 
Herodotos  renders  the  sound///;  at  Thebes,  Hekataios  got  the  sound  as  /.  Both 
forms  are  found  in  Ptolemaic  Greek  transcriptions,  and  also  b  as  in  Boubastis, 
Bouto,  Anubis.  In  Coptic,/  is  southern  and  ///  northern,  both  merging  into  b  in 
late  times.  All  these  results  are  reached  by  the  large  number  of  examples  quoted 
in  the  paper  ;  here  only  the  barest  summary  can  be  given. 

J  ^^t-     Probably  the  double  sign   J  A^  or  J  ^^  is  the  full  b,  while  the 

single  sign  is  v,  which  probably  weakened  to  w.  In  Arabic  times  the  b  passed 
into  V.  In  Hebrew,  the  belli  is  always  rendered  thus.  In  cuneiform  it  is  always  b, 
and  also  in  Herodotos.  In  later  times  it  passed  to  the  digamma,  or  was  entirely 
lost,  as  in  Pouasti  for  Bubastis,  Harmais  for  Heremheb,  and  Soukhos  for  Sebek. 
It  became  confused  sometimes  with  ;;/  as  Meroe  for  Beriia,  Pakhnoubis  and 
Pakhnoumis.  In  Roman  names  it  is  regularly  equal  to  b.  The  transition  to  v  was 
common  in  Coptic.     We  know  of  the  use  of  b  for  v  usually  in  late  Latin. 

'<-=^  had  always  a  single  sound,  between/  and  b.  It  is  used  for  an  aspirated 
pe,  Hebrew,  as  in  kafr.  Cuneiform  not  having  /,  rendered  it  by  /.  The  Greeks 
rendered  it  by  phi,  and  at  the  end  of  names  by  bela.  In  Ptolemaic  it  is  always  ////. 
In  Coptic  it  is/,  and  in  Arabic /^. 

The  four  dentals  probably  cover  seven  or  eight  different  sounds,  according  to 
period. 

a^.  This  was  usually  rendered  /  in  cuneiform,  rarely  d.  In  Hebrew  it  was 
equal  to  lau,  and  rarely  to  teth.  In  the  Saite  Age  it  was  in  Greek  rendered  lau, 
but  before  an  aspirate  it  became  theta. 

The  la  land  sign  is  sometimes  used  for  della,  and  I  or  7il  for  Latin  d.  The  late 
Greek  Ikela,  pronounced  almost  as  /,  was  also  rendered  by  ^ .  In  Coptic  it  became 
confounded  with  thela  and  della  sounds,  the  latter  written  with  /.  The  true  /  only 
remained  in  final  letters. 

s > ,  originally  ///.     This  early  became  equal  to  o  on  the  one  hand,  or  on  the 

other  (f^  or  | .     The  Hebrew  tau  is  rendered  by  both  s=a  and  c^ .     Brugsch  gave 

many  examples  of  s=>  becoming  ^ad  or  shin.  These  are  examined  in  detail,  and 
reduced  to  the  conclusions  that  it  was  never  gad,  and  that  in  Saite  to  Roman  times 
it  was  usually  a  variant  of  o,  but  sometimes  kept  its  early  hissing  sound,  and  then 
became  z  =janja  =  sigma. 

is  rendered  z  in  cuneiform,  and  used  for  Hebrew  tzade.     At  the  same 


time  it  became  confounded  with 


"^andj^. 


8o  Journals. 

^^ .  Originally  in  the  XVI I  Ith  dynasty  this  was  ts  or  ch  as  in  chWA.  In  late 
times  ts  passed  into  delta  and  theta,  and  further  into  tati,  sigma,  and  j'anja.  In  the 
geographical  lists  ^^  and   |   are  usual  for  tzade,  more  rarely  for  sain ;    and  in 

cuneiform  taade.     The  ^^  in  Old  Kingdom  words  appears  in  the  Middle  Kingdom 

and  Empire  as  cr^s,  and  further  passes  into  c^,  and  this  transition  is  also  shown  by 
cuneiform  equivalents.  The  change  into  d  and  /  was  more  rapid  in  Ptolemaic  and 
complete  in  Roman  times,  while  in  Coptic  it  passes  into  janja  mainly  in  the  North 
but  g  in  the  South. 

c=5i.  In  the  XVI I  Ith  dynasty  the  equivalent  is  daleth.  It  does  not  happen 
to  occur  in  early  cuneiform,  but  in  the  XXVth  dynasty  it  is  rendered  by  teth. 
Aramean  continues  to  use  teth.  Later  the  plain  value  tan  arrives.  In  Ptolemaic 
names  it  is  generally  used  for  Greek  tmt.     In  Roman  names  it  is  a'  or  ^  equally. 

Gutturals  and  Aspirates. 

':3P«,  and  the  vocalised  variant  | ) ,  covered  two  values  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty, 

both  k  and  hard  g.  In  the  geographical  lists  it  is  used  for  kaph  and  also  for  gimel. 
Gimel  appears  to  have  become  hardened,  and  then  a  was  used  for  it.     The  early 

cuneiform  renders  ^z:?*  and  ( |  by  ku,  or  sometimes  gu.     Under  Sheshenq  the  ^3::* 

continues  as  kaph  and  sometimes  ^nW.  In  the  XXVth  dynasty  the  cuneiform 
uses  ku,  or  sometimes  emphasises  it  as  uk-ku.  In  Greek,  kappa  was  usual, 
but  khi  appears   owing    to    the    variable   usage   in    Ionic.     In    Ptolemaic    both 

equivalents  were  used,  but  khi  regularly  for  \ )  in  royal  names.     From  the  Saite 

Age,  perhaps  from  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  there  were  two  sounds  for  ^^:::::^  the 
southern  k  the  northern  kh,  both  of  which  passed  into  Coptic.  The  fixed  system 
of  hieroglyphs  prevents  changes  being  apparent,  much  as  the  fixed  spelling  of 

English  hides  phonetic  change  now  ;  but  the  variants  of  '^^n::^  changing  with  ^°^ 
shows  how  far  the  unwritten  modifications  had  gone. 

A  was  probably  very  close  to  qoph  and  koppa  originally.  In  the  geographical 
lists  it  is  usually  the  rendering  of  qopli,  but  occasionally  of  gimel.  The  cuneiform 
of  the  XXVth  dynasty  always  renders  it  as  q.  The  Greek  varies  between  k,  g, 
and  kh.  In  the  Ptolemaic  words  complete  confusion  is  seen  between  ■';3::*,  A,  and 
S,  though  each  was  continued  generally  in  the  words  where  first  used.  In  Roman 
spelling  all  were  interchanged.  In  Coptic,  owing  to  A  being  reduced  to'^:^:^,  it 
became  k,  which  normally  passed  to  kh  in  the  northern  dialect.  A  also  became  g 
in  both  North  and  South,  and  as  such  it  also  passed  into  the  tiquiva.\ent  j'anj'a. 

ffi  seems  to  have  included  two  sounds  originally,  the  usual  hard  g  and  a 
guttural  g  as  in  German  Tag  or  Arabic  gheyn.  By  the  first  value  it  was  confounded 
with  ^=^,  and  by  the  second  with  A.  The  geographical  lists  express  gimel  usually 
by  '::::^» ,  less  often  by  A ;  but  ffi  is  used  where  the  Arabic  form  has  passed  into 
gheyn,  as  for  Gaza.  [This  suggests  that  the  real  local  pronunciation  has  been  only 
approximated  by  Hebrew  and  other  writing.]  This  special  sound  was  rendered  in 
cuneiform  by  kh.  It  seems  that  ffl  was  used  for  a  guttural  like  ^//^jw,  usual  among 
the  Rutennu,  who  perhaps  were  non-Semitic.  But  it  is  rare  in  the  South  Syrian 
names.  In  the  lists  of  Sheshenq  it  is  usual  {or  gimel.  In  Ptolemaic  and  Roman 
use  ffl,  ^:=^,  and  A,  were  used  indifferently.  In  Coptic  the  southern  equivalent  is 
shima,  while  the  northern  is  janja. 


Journals.  8 1 

m.  In  geographical  lists  this  is  used  for  Semitic  he.  In  cuneiform,  having  no 
he,  the  hetk  is  used  instead ;  in  its  stronger  form  equal  to  the  Arabic  kha.  In  the 
XXVth  dynasty  the  only  instance  of  fO  is  either  ignored  or  represented  by  a 
lengthened  vowd.  The  Greek  uses  a  simple  vowel,  a,  e,  or  i,  at  the  beginning  of 
words.  In  the  Ptolemaic  writing  the  Egyptians  used  fQ  as  an  auxiliary  to  /,  t, 
and  k  to  equate  with  the  Greek  ph,  tli,  and  kli.     They  also  used  it  for  the  Greek 

initial  aspirate.  It  always  was  kept  distinct  from  8,  even  in  late  hieroglyphs.  In 
Coptic  it  always  corresponds  with  h. 

9  was  a  strong  h  like  heth,  or  ha  in  Arabic  ;  but  it  approximated  so  much  to 

rn  that  when  the  Coptic  alphabet  was  started  one  sign  sufficed  for  both.  In  the 
geographical  lists  it  is  always  the  rendering  of  hetk.  In  early  cuneiform  it  is  the 
same,  and  continued  hi  the  XXVth  dynasty  and  in  the  Aramean.  The  Greeks  in 
beginning  words  used  the  hard  or  soft  breathing,  or  omitted  it  entirely  in  the 
middle  of  words.  [This  shows  that  it  weakened  to  the  value  of  FD.]  Rarely  it  is 
represented  by  khi.  In  Ptolemaic  the  same  treatment  continues,  but  where  it  is 
preceded  by  the  article  it  coalesces  to  iorm  phi  or  theta.  In  the  demotic  an  actual 
inversion  takes  place,  and  the  Greek  aspirate  is  rendered  by  FD . 

«»-=»  and  ©.  As  early  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  »-=■  was  interchanging  with  r~w~i 
commonly  ;  yet  in  Coptic  it  only  occasionally  becomes  sh.  The  primitive  value  of 
*>— =>  appears  to  have  been  between  sh  and  kh,  much  like  the  German  soft  ch  in  ich. 
The  value  of  ©  is  more  the  hard  kh,  as  in  German  buck  or  the  Spanish  /  as  in 
Jeres. 

In  the  geographical  lists  «*-=>  is  never  used ;  but  q  and  T  are  frequent  as 

equivalents  oi  lieth.    In  early  cuneiform,  kli  is  used  for  ®  as  well  as  for   f[]    and  8; 

and  in  the  list  of  Sheshenq  heth  is  rendered  by  H[F ,  *=^ ,  and  9  ,  but  never  by 

©   T ,  or  «»-=>.     In  the  XXVth  dynasty  kh  is  used  as  before.     Apparently,  all  the 

aspirates  were  softening  then  into  one  weak  form,  and  ®  was  becoming  C3E3  .  It 
remained  as  kh,  however,  in  the  royal  names  in  Herodotos.  But  in  Ptolemaic  it 
becomes  s,  as  in  Manetho.  The  discussion  of  the  Coptic  forms  of  h  and  kh  is 
complex,  and  does  not  reflect  upon  the  earlier  language. 

Sibilants. 

land—*—,  though  partly  distinct  in  Pyramid  Texts,  yet  interchange  there 

to  some  extent.  By  the  Xllth  dynasty  there  was  no  difference  except  in  the 
convenience  of  grouping  the  signs.     In  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  there  is  only  pure 

convention.  The  united  1  and  — #—  are  used  for  both  qad  and  sin;  on  the  other 
hand  the  early  cuneiform  renders  them  by  shin,  as  also  in  the  XXVth  dynasty  in 
most  cases.     In  all  Greek  and  Coptic  renderings  these  are  s  only. 

r-n-i.  The  sound  of  this  and  the  syllables  LMi  [ii  was  as  the  sh  in  {xcsh,  or 
j/iiield,  the  shin  of  Hebrew  and  Canaanite  in  the  names  of  the  lists,  and  in  the 
cuneiform,  though  occasionally  rendered  by  sin.  In  Greek  it  was  rendered  s.  In 
late  Greek  the  shin  was  rendered  sz. 

F 


83  Journals. 

Vol.  XXXVIII,   Livraisons  1-2. 

Vowels  properly  so  called. 

The  first  stage  is  to  discriminate  the  real  vahies  in  Coptic.  Alfa  has  two 
values,  a  as  in  Antioch,  aw  as  in  w^r,  water.  This  appears  clearly  in  spelling 
Morkos  for  Markos  ;  but  at  the  start  of  Coptic  it  is  always  the  same  as  alpha.  The 
long  a  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  may  become  a  or  ou  in  the  XXVth  or  Greek. 
The  short  d  may  become  /  or  i.  The  general  course  is  that  a  becomes  ou ; 
a  remains  d,  but  may  become  8 ;  a,  unaccented,  changes  to  e. 

El  is  always  sounded  a  in  present  Coptic ;  alpha  and  epsilon  in  Greek  both 
pass  into  ei  Coptic. 

Yoda  is  written  ei  initially.  It  comes  probably  from  e,  and  that  earlier  from 
&  or  even  d. 

Long  or  short  o,  6  or  ^,  oA  or  aH  are  indifferently  ou  or  au  in  present  Coptic. 
In  the  early  Greek  and  in  the  XXVth  dynasty  Assyrian  it  varies  as  ou,  o,  or  6. 

He  or  hu,  in  North  Coptic  hi  or  khe,  is  an  early  Coptic  variation  of  u.  Though 
the  upsilon  in  Archaic  Greek  was  ou,  yet  it  was  early  shortened  to  /,  as  it  is  now. 

The  diphthongs  and  double  vowels  in  Coptic  are  fully  discussed,  but  they  do 
not  lead  to  conclusions  on  earlier  vocalisation.  It  is  concluded  that  a  variation  of 
probably  eighteen  or  twenty  vowel  sounds  in  the  XlXth  dynasty  have  become 
reduced  to  ten  in  the  Coptic. 

Signs  corresponding  to  Egyptian   Vowel  sounds. 

This  section  deals  with  the  changes  back  to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  We  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  sound  changes  and  sign  changes.  For  instance,  in 
English,  a  represents  half-a-dozen  sounds,  which  have  nothing  in  common  with  its 
Anglo-Saxon  or  Low-German  value.  Yet  a  is  not  a  "  vague  vowel  "  or  a  "  feeble 
consonant." 

First  will  be  studied  (1,    ^^v  >  o-     The  signs  (1(1  and   V\  will  be  treated 

later  as  sonants.     II  and  \\  are  only  vocalised  duals.     2  is  a  cursive  form  of  v^. 

In  late  writing  XJ  is  substituted  for  o  as  determinative  of  the  word  .     A 

long  history  is  given  of  the  views  of  Champollion  and  later  writers. 

The  use  of  vowel  signs  has  nothing  to  do  with  race,  or  the  origin  of  a  language. 
In  Malagasy  or  Javan  the  Arabic  alphabet  is  used,  regardless  of  the  nature  of  the 
speech.  The  Hellenes  used  the  Phoenician  alphabet,  and  the  Achaians  used  the 
Cypriote  syllabary.  The  Canaanite,  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  languages  were 
all  Semitic,  and  yet  used  a  cuneiform  syllabary  which  did  not  confound  vowel 
values,  but  used  separate  signs  for  each  vocal  syllable.  Therefore  the  question  of 
the  presence  or  absence  of  true  vowel  signs  in  Egyptian  is  quite  distinct  from  the 
other  question  of  a  Semitic  connection  of  the  language. 

The  late  changes  of  a  vowel  are  no  evidence  that  such  variation  was  original. 
The  Latin  a  has  passed  into  a  in  Paris,  &  in  Parisii,  e  in  pere,  ai  in  viaiti,  ie  in 
chien,  au  or  the  sound  d  in  chaud,  should  we  therefore  say  that  in  Cicero's  time 
a  was  a  "feeble  consonant"  or  a  "vague  vowel"?     No  more  true  is  it'  to  assert 

this  of  (1  because  of  its  varying  descent  in  late  forms  and  in  Coptic. 

"  For  me,  as  for  Naville,  for  Gol^nischeff,  for  all  those  who  refuse  to  admit  the 
imperative  affirmations  of  the  Berlin  school,  Egyptian  has  possessed  original  vowel 


Journals.  83 

signs  of  the  same  nature  as  the  modern ;  but  as  its  graphic  system  was  almost 
entirely  fixed  at  an  early  date,  while  the  spoken  language  followed  its  own  course, 
the  written  language  has  obstinately  preserved  its  forms ;  and  the  vowel  signs — 
for  the  reasons  W*  have  noticed — have  taken,  historically,  various  values  which  do 
not  always  seem  to  belong  to  the  primitive  value."  "  We  can  go  back  by  degrees  to 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  through  Coptic,  Greek,  Assyrian  and  Canaanean  transcrip- 
tions, but  beyond  that  we  have  nothing  but  hypotheses,  more  or  less  strongly 
influenced." 

[We  might  remark,  also,  that  we  know  nothing  of  the  grammar  or  sounds  of 
Western  Semitic  before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  except  by  theory  and  deductions 
projected  back  from  that  Age.  To  extend  such  theorising  back  thousands  of  years 
before  the  earliest  facts  known  to  us,  and  then  to  force  Egyptian  of  the  1st  dynasty 
to  fit  the  theories  which  have  been  constructed,  is  a  process  which  seems  bound 
to  produce  fallacies.     The  continuation  of  the  above  article  only  begins  the  subject 

of  0 ,  it  will  therefore  be  summarised  along  with  the  future  continuation.] 

Sottas,  Henri. —  Une petite  horloge  astronomique  Gr^co-Egyptienne. 

KUENTZ,  Charles. — Note  sur  un  gnomon  portatif  Greco-Egyptienne. — These 
two  articles  deal  with  the  small  dial  published  by  M.  Cl^dat.  They  explain  at 
great  length  (18  pp.)  what  has  been  already  stated  in  half-a-dozen  lines  in  Ancient 
Egypt,  191 5,  p.  184.  We  read:  "Cet  instrument  est  sans  doute  deconcertant  de 
prime  abord,  car  la  forme  qu'il  pr^sente  n'a  jamais  ^t^  jusqu'ici  rencontree  autant 
que  je  sache."  Yet  in  1894  such  a  dial  was  sold  in  the  Hoffman  sale  in  Paris, 
Lot  456,  and  fully  described  and  illustrated  in  the  catalogue ;  also  a  similar  dial 
has  been  for  many  years  on  view  at  University  College.  It  is,  therefore,  well- 
known  to  many  persons.  It  is  assumed  by  the  writers  that  the  gnomon  must  have 
been  a  solid  rising  from  a  base  to  an  edge  or  a  point.  This  is  not  necessary  ;  any 
point  fixed  in  space  to  cast  the  shadow  would  suffice ;  and  as  the  dial  at  University 
College  has  a  socket  on  the  top,  it  seems  likely  that  a  statuette  upon  it  held  a 
spear,  or  some  object,  forward  to  cast  the  shadow.  As  the  dial  is  quite  independent 
of  direction,  and  only  needs  to  be  levelled,  a  single  point  could  cast  a  shadow  on 
any  of  the  month  lines. 

The  fresh  idea  here  lies  in  a  suggestion  by  M.  Loret,  that  the  hieroglyph  9"=^ 
is  such  a  dial  as  this,  with  a  block  gnomon  and  a  plummet  hanging  from  it  to 
level  it. 

MasPERO,  G. — Quelques  divinites  dans  les  arbres.  Besides  the  Osiris  enclosed 
in  a  tree  trunk,  there  are  other  tree  deities.  On  the  shrine  of  Saft  is  a  "  Hathor  in 
the  nebs"  ox  syzyphus,  different  to  the  Hathor  of  Memphis,  "lady  of  the  nehet" ; 
also  a  Heremakhti  lodged  in  his  tree ;  a  Shu  ;  the  two  lions  of  Heliopolis,  Shu  and 
Tefnut,  in  a  chapel  hidden  by  a  tree.  The  nebs  also  gave  its  name  to  Pnubs,  or 
Dakkeh  in  Nubia,  where  Tehuti  was  worshipped  ;  moreover  in  Pap.  Sal!.  I,  Tehuti 
is  a  species  of  palm.  [There  was  also  a  palm-goddess  in  Roman  times  found 
figured  on  terracotta  images.] 

Daressy,  G. — La  classement  des  rots  de  la  famille  des  Bubastites.  In  this 
article  the  conclusions  of  M.  Gauthier  on  this  complex  subject  are  discussed.  The 
difficulties  arise  largely  from  the  same  name  being  repeated  in  different  generations 
with   small  differences ;    also  from  the  isolated  nature  of  the  facts,  without  any 

F  2 


84  Journals. 

original  document  of  an  extended  period  ;  and  further  from  there  being  concurrent 
lines  of  descent  in  the  Thebaid  and  the  Delta.  The  complication  has  now  reached 
a  fresh  stage  by  M.  Daressy  claiming  as  obvious  no  less  than  three  confusions  of 
different  names  by  the  scribes.  With  three  errors  assumed,  a  great  deal  can  be 
done  in  fitting  any  system.  It  looks  as  if  the  matter  is  insoluble  without  some 
further  documents  to  decide  points.  The  most  promising  treatment  would  be  to 
write  out  each  document  on  a  separate  paper,  to  the  same  scale  of  generations,  and 
without  any  assumptions  or  completions  of  cartouches,  and  then  try  to  fit  the 
isolated  scraps  into  order.  In  the  present  state  of  the  subject  it  does  not  seem  of 
use  to  try  to  give  an  abstract. 

MaSPERO,  G. — Hirodote,  II,  150.  This  legend  that  the  Fayum  lake  discharged 
into  the  Syrtis  of  Libya,  underground,  is  parallel  to  present  beliefs.  There  is 
a  village  four  miles  south  of  Philae,  on  the  west  bank,  at  the  foot  of  Gebel  Shemt 
el-Wah,  called  Nazlet  Shemt  el-Wah,  where  it  is  said  that  a  subterranean  branch  of 
the  Nile  runs  to  the  Oasis  of  Dush.  In  that  oasis,  near  the  spring,  the  people 
showed — about  ten  years  ago — pieces  of  a  boat,  with  an  anchor,  and  said  that  they 
had  come  through  underground  from  the  Nile,  and  that  they  had  also  received  other 
wrecks  from  the  Nile  by  that  way. 

CLfeDAT,  Jean. — Necropole  de  Qantareh.  This  is  an  account  of  excavations 
in  a  cemetery  extending  east  of  Qantareh,  up  to  the  ruins  of  a  town  two  miles 
eastward  at  the  north  end  of  Lake  Balah.  This  town  is  claimed  as  being  Zaru,  but 
no  evidence  is  given  for  this  identification,  though  it  seems  likely  enough.  An 
obelisk  is  marked  as  existing  there  before  the  Canal,  and  two  sphinxes  are  reported 
there  thirty  years  ago  ;  but  no  trace  of  these  can  be  found  at  present.  Seven  pages 
are  given  to  describing  the  cemetery  and  groups  of  tombs  ;  but  whether  the 
ushabtis  are  of  the  relief  style  with  back  pillar  (XXVI-XXX)  or  only  painted 
(before  XXV)  is  never  stated,  nor  is  there  a  single  drawing  of  the  vases  or  other 
objects  found  ;  the  account  is  therefore  of  no  archaeological  value.  In  a  few  tombs 
amulets  were  found,  but  the  materials  are  not  stated.  From  scanty  remarks 
indicating  the  period,  these  seem  to  be  about  the  XXXth  dynasty  and  early 
Ptolemaic  Age. 

MaSPERO,  G. — Sur  le  sens  juridique  de  ^^ .  This  paper  re-states  the  inter- 
pretation of  tn&o-kheru  as  a  legal  term,  a  position  assumed  to  be  new  in  Dr.  Gardiner's 
Tomb  of  Avtenemhat.  "  On  oublie  si  vite  en  ^gyptologie  ce  qu'on  a  lu,  et,  pour  peu 
que  r^crit  soit  ancien,  on  neglige  si  r^solument  de  le  lire,  que  ce  sera  une  surprise 
pour  tout  le  monde  et  pour  M.  Gardiner  lui-meme  d'apprendre  que  j'avais  eu  la 
meme  idee  que  c'est  une  de  celles  qui  ont  d^termin6  mon  interpretation,  et  que  je 
I'avais  indiqu^e,  il  y  a  plus  d'un  quart  de  siecle,  dans  un  memoire  Sur  Vexpression 
Mdkhrdou,  qui,  compose  en  1880,  ne  fut,  par  accident,  public  qu'en  1892."  Sir 
Gaston's  position  is,  that  though  meaning  "  with  the  right  intonation,"  the  truth  of 
voice  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  legal  justification.  All  ancient  laws  were  mixed 
in  a  kind  of  ritual — what  referred  to  property  and  what  referred  to  sacrifices  or  to 
the  dead.  A  passage  in  Aelian  implies  that  the  old  laws  were  rhythmic,  and 
Aristotle  says  that  they  were  chanted  before  they  were  written ;  hence  called 
vofwi  in  Greek  and  carmina  in  Latin.  Such  a  chant  was  not  complex,  but  like  the 
Oriental  recitations.  A  just  voice  was  needed  therefore,  and  an  exact  wording  for 
a  legal  formula.     [We  have  likewise  the  "  patter  "  of  an  old  formula  embodied  in 


Journals,  85 

the  marriage  service,  "  to  have  and  to  hold  from  this  day  forth,  for  better  for  worse, 
for  richer  for  poorer,"  etc.]  Hence  the  view  that  the  truth  of  voice,  or  exact 
knowledge  of  the  magic  patter  was  necessary  to  avoid  embarrassments  in  the  future 
life,  and  he  who  knew  the  right  jargon  completely  was  thereby  justified  by  his  true 
voice.  To  be  "  true  of  voice  against  his  enemies,"  meant  that  he  had  the  right 
sing-song  to  subdue  them.  [This  is  like  a  Norse  ceremony:  "Then  Kotkell  had 
a  great  spell-working  scaffold  made,  and  they  all  went  up  on  to  it,  and  they  sang 
hard  twisted  songs  that  were  enchantments.  And  presently  a  great  tempest  arose. 
Thord  ....  continued  out  at  sea  as  he  was,  soon  knew  that  the  storm  was  raised 
against  him."  {Laxdale  Saga,  XXXV).  Here  doubtless  the  "  true  voice  "  was  as 
essential  to  the  spell  to  overcome  the  enemy  as  it  was  in  Egypt] 

Chassinat,  Emile. — La  niise  d  mart  rituelle  cTApis.  This  opens  with  the 
passages  from  Pliny,  Ammianus,  and  Solinus,  stating  that  the  Apis  bull  was 
drowned  after  a  term  of  years.  Plutarch  states  that  the  term  of  years  was  25. 
Two  Apis  bulls  are  stated  to  have  exceeded  this.  One  is  stated  to  have  lived  26 
years  ;  another  was  born  in  the  i  ith  year  and  died  in  the  37th  year  of  Sheshenq  IV. 
[Either  of  these  might  have  only  just  exceeded  25  years,  and  if  the  drowning  was 
at  high  Nile,  the  few  weeks  or  months  over  25  years  would  be  within  the  rule]. 

It  seems  established  that  the  Apis  was  Horus  during  his  life;  see  "The 
majesty  of  Apis  went  to  heaven,  it  is  Horus  who  became  Osiris,"  and  other  such 
references.  Apis  was  also  assimilated  with  Atmu,  with  Ptah,  and  with  the  Nile. 
He  became  Osiris  after  his  death.  The  conclusion  is  reached  that  Apis  was 
originally  a  Nile-god. 

The  title  part  of  the  paper  is  reached  after  twenty  pages  of  the  previous 
dissertation.  It  depends  on  the  statement  that  Apis  and  also  the  Hathor  cow 
"  went  to  Qebhu,  his  spirit  mounted  to  heaven  and  joined  itself  to  Ra."  Qebhu  is 
the  cataract  region,  also  the  name  of  a  sacred  lake  or  well  at  Letopolis,  Heliopolis, 
Edfu,  and  near  the  Apis  temple  at  Memphis.  Naturally,  all  such  places  were 
cool  or  refreshing.  On  the  strength  of  this,  stated  in  ten  pages,  it  is  proposed  that 
the  bulls  were  drowned.  Yet  the  last  quotation  of  all,  that  Sety  I  "  went  to  Qebhu, 
joined  the  sky,  and  was  united  to  Ra,"  cannot  mean  that  Sety  was  drowned  ;  and, 
if  it  describes  the  natural  death  of  the  king,  why  not  of  the  bull  also  ? 

LoRET,  Victor. — Le  Hire  \  \,  U  D-  "^^'^  paper  largely  quotes  passages 
illustrating  the  sense  of  the  first  three  subjects,  horned  cattle,  hoofed  cattle  (as 
asses)  and  birds,  which  all  are  agreed  upon.     The  really  original  point  is  that  the 

last   sign    occurs   in    ^^  ^\    ^T  ^    ^    V\    p  {Pap-   Berlin    3027)    and 

similar  in  Pap.  Nebseni.  Hence  the  reading  of  ^  is  neshem,  a  fish  scale,  and  the 
sense  of  the  whole  title  is  overseer  of  cattle  and  ungulates,  birds  and  fishes. 

Black.man,  Aylward  M. — On  the  reading  of\'^     as  "  nyswt." 

I      A/\/VVNA 

Gardiner,  Alan  H. — Additional  Note.  These  notes  refer  to  the  nesut 
reading  as  supported  by  a  play  on  words  of  mysut  parallel  to  nesut;  and,  above  all, 

by  the  coffin  text,  in  which    I     ^     A   is  replaced  by  V^  A  .     (Lacau,  in 

Recueil,  XXXV,  228.)  ""^  ^_        <^  D 

F  3 


(    86    ) 

REVIEWS. 


Ancient  Times:  A  Histoty  of  the  Early  Wor/d.— By  ]  AMES  Henry  BREASTED. 
Sm.  8vo,  731  pp.,  8  coloured  plates,  276  figures,  38  maps,  rso  dollars.  1916. 
(Ginn.) 

The  author,  whose  great  services  to  Egyptian  literature  are  so  well  known, 
has  here  put  all  teachers  of  history  in  his  debt  by  writing  what  has  long  been 
wanted — a  history  of  civilisation.  To  compress  all  the  course  of  events  before 
Charlemagne  into  a  pocket  volume,  and  give  a  connected  view  of  the  whole  human 
movement,  is  a  feat  of  skilful  omission  of  detail :  much  that  we  know — sometimes 
with  a  painful  familiarity — has  disappeared.  In  its  stead  we  have  a  broad  view 
of  the  general  character  of  each  age,  its  growth  from  the  past,  and  its  relation 
to  the  future. 

The  pre-classical  world,  Greece  and  Rome,  have  equal  shares  of  attention. 
The  mere  political  events  are  subordinated  to  the  larger  questions  of  the  nature 
and  outlook  of  the  civilisation  :  why  in  each  age  men  thought  as  they  did,  how 
they  were  conditioned,  what  their  capacities  were,  how  they  met  the  changes  in 
the  world.  A  fore-runner  in  such  a  treatment  is  Mrs.  Armitage's  Cliildhood  of  the 
English  Nation,  a  history  of  motive  and  immediate  reality. 

Our  concern  here  is  more  with  the  section  on  Egypt,  which  fills  sixty-five 
pages.  Only  nine  names  of  kings  occur  in  the  whole.  The  Hyksos  are  never 
mentioned,  which  is  as  well,  for  there  is  no  room  for  them  in  the  Berlin  chronology 
used  in  this  book.  It  is  rather  hard  on  the  unsuspecting  reader  not  to  have  the 
slightest  hint  that  the  Egyptians  recorded  their  dynasties  as  beginning  over  two 
thousand  years  before  Berlin  allows  of  their  existence.  Less  than  one  page  deals 
with  the  long  pre-historic  ages  and  the  rise  of  the  civilisation.  Six  pages  describe 
the  rise  of  hieroglyphs.  Four  pages  are  given  to  the  calendar  and  other  pre-pyramid 
knowledge.  All  this  part  seems  meagre  for  describing  one  of  the  growths  of 
civilisation  which  is  best  known  in  its  details.  Twenty-five  pages  describe  the 
greatest  period,  that  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  well  illustrated  and  vividly  treated.  It 
is  unhappy  to  find  put  here  glassware  of  the  XXVIth  dynasty  and  a  house 
restoration  of  the  XVIIIth.  Then  come  six  pages  on  the  Middle  Kingdom, 
where  some  of  the  scenes  of  Beni  Hasan,  instead  of  an  XVIIIth  dynasty  papyrus, 
would  have  been  an  improvement.  The  Empire  has  twelve  pages  and  six  of  the 
plates.  Three  pages  on  the  later  ages,  and  three  more  on  the  writing,  complete 
the  account.  Of  the  nine  pages  given  to  the  mode  of  writing  we  would  gladly 
give  up  most  in  exchange  for  some  of  the  literature  which  the  author  has  at  his 
fingers'  ends,  and  an  account  of  the  growth  of  the  arts  through  the  prehistoric  ages. 
As  an  outline  of  the  successive  civilisations  of  Egypt,  this  account  is  a  successful 
and  original  piece  of  work.  We  may  note  on  p.  54  that  deep  graves  did  not  precede 
the  discovery  of  metals  ;  also  one  pyramid  figured  never  existed,  as  there  is  none 
known  between  the  coated  step  pyramid  of  Sneferu  and  the  greatest  pyramid, 
of  Khufu.  The  description  of  a  step  pyramid  as  "  made  by  placing  a  series  of 
tombs  one  above  another  "  should  be  amended,  as  there  is  only  one  tomb,  and  the 
series  is  of  successive  coatings  around  it.  The  German  fallacy  of  figuring  palms 
around  the  temple  of  Khafra  is  copied ;  in  reality  that  ground  was  far  above  the 
level  of  vegetation  in  the  early  time.     A  misprint  in  fig.  72  needs  notice. 


Reviews.  87 

A  special  feature  is  the  fulness  of  the  series  of  maps,  designed  on  purpose  to 
show  the  stages  of  political  power  of  each  country,  and  mostly  original,  though  the 
early  state  of  Sumer  and  Akkad  has  been  lifted  unacknowledged  from  Prof  King. 
It  is  much  to  ^  hoped  that  this  book,  with,  perhaps,  a  little  redistribution  of 
subject,  and  replacing  English  for  American  comparisons,  may  come  into  use  for 
historical  teaching  in  Britain. 

The  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  Part  XII. — By  B.  P.  Grenfell  and  A.  S.  HUNT. 
1916.     (Egypt  Exploration  Fund.) 

Another  welcome  instalment  from  our  two  scholars,  who  maintain  the  credit 
of  England  as  the  foremost  country  in  this  subject.  This  volume  is  unusually 
full  of  interest  on  social  history,  the  heads  of  which  we  notice  here  in  order  to 
direct  readers  to  the  material. 

It  opens  with  a  harsh  illustration  of  the  severity  of  the  claims  for  public 
service.  A  man  was  appointed  tax-gatherer  for  a  village,  and  rather  than  face 
the  trouble  and  obloquy,  with  the  probability  of  ruin,  he  preferred  honourable  ruin 
to  begin  with,  and  renounced  all  his  property  to  the  emperor.  The  next  step  was 
the  Imperial  appointment  of  the  man  who  originally  proposed  the  renounced  tax- 
gatherer,  giving  him  the  property  and  requiring  him  to  do  the  duty.  It  seems 
as  if  thus  the  duty  could  be  pushed  through  several  hands,  accumulating  property 
by  ruining  the  men  as  it  proceeded,  until  at  last  there  were  enough  confiscated 
estates  attached  to  the  duty  to  make  it  pay  someone  to  do  it.  This  shows  the 
terrible  economic  state  of  Egypt,  that  as  early  as  A.D.  201  the  public  claims  could 
ruin  an  innocent  man  by  being  thrust  upon  him. 

Home  rule  in  Egypt  is  illustrated  by  a  decree  of  Caracalla,  within  a  few  years 
of  the  granting  of  municipal  senates :  "  If  a  senator  strike  or  censure  in  an  unseemly 
manner  the  prytanis,  or  another  senator,  he  shall  be  deprived  of  his  rank,  and  set 
in  a  position  of  dishonour." 

The  public  safety  was  in  a  bad  way,  as  about  A.D.  213  a  decree  was  put  out 
by  Baebius  Juncinus  :  "  I  have  already,  in  a  previous  letter,  ordered  you  to  search 
out  robbers  with  every  care,  warning  you  of  the  jseril  of  neglect,  and  now  I  wish 
to  confirm  my  decision  by  a  decree,  in  order  that  all  inhabitants  of  Egypt  may 
know  that  I  am  not  treating  this  duty  as  an  affair  of  secondary  importance,"  etc.,  etc. 
This  is  followed  by  another  proclamation :  "  That  it  is  impossible  to  exterminate 
robbers  apart  from  those  who  shelter  them  is  evident  to  all,  but  when  they  are 
deprived  of  their  helpers  we  shall  quickly  punish  them.  There  are  many  methods 
of  giving  them  shelter ;  some  do  so  because  they  are  partners  in  their  misdeeds, 

others  without  sharing  in  these,  yet "     This  is  the  documentary  background 

for  Achilles  Tatius. 

As  in  modern  times,  money  was  the  universal  key  in  Egypt,  and  the  buying 
exemption  from  the  corvee  was  so  usual,  that  strict  orders  were  given  for  the 
corvee  on  canals,  "  to  see  that  the  overseers  usually  elected  for  the  purpose 
are  chosen  from  magistrates  or  private  persons  who  will  compel  everyone  to 
perform  his  proper  work  by  personal  service,  according  to  the  rule  given  in  the 

constitution   of  the  appointment,   with    no    malice   or   favour and   that 

absolutely  no  money  is  exacted  from  anyone  in  place  of  work.  If  anyone  dare 
to  attempt  exactions  or  neglect  these  orders,  let  him  know  that  not  only  his 
property  but  his  life  will  be  at  stake." 

The  continual  depreciation  of  the  Alexandrian  coinage  even  led  to  hoarding 
the  old  Ptolemaic  tetradrachms,  the  forebears  of  the  wretched  copper  dumps  of 

F   4 


88  Reviews. 

the  third  century.  The  coinage  was  bad  enough  under  Gallienus,  but  when  the 
further  debasement  of  the  usurpers  Macrianus  and  Quietus  came  out,  the  banks 
closed  in  despair.  Promptly  came  a  proclamation  of  the  governor :  "  Since  the 
officials  have  assembled  and  accused  the  bankers  of  the  banks  of  exchange  of 
having  closed  them  on  account  of  their  unwillingness  to  accept  the  divine  coin  of 
the  emperors,  it  has  become  necessary  that  an  injunction  should  be  issued  to  all 
the  owners  of  the  banks  to  open  them,  and  to  accept  and  exchange  all  coin  except 
the  absolutely  spurious  and  counterfeit ;  and  not  to  them  only,  but  to  all  who 
engage  in  business  transactions  of  any  kind  whatever,  knowing,  that  if  they  disobey 
this  injunction,  they  will  experience  the  penalties  already  ordained  for  them  in  the 
past  by  his  highness  the  praefect."  The  milreis  of  Brazil  was  quite  outdone  in 
baseness  by  the  nominal  currency  of  the  fourth  century,  in  which  2,250,000  denarii, 
or  1,500  talents,  was  to  be  paid  for  a  new  carpet,  really  worth  about  ;^io. 

The  reports  of  the  Senate  of  Oxyrhynkhos  give  a  curious  living  view  of  affairs. 
The  prytanis  had  called  an  emergency  meeting  to  settle  some  immediate  business, 
and  on  his  stating  it  in  general  council,  "The  senators  said  :  '  Invaluable  prytanis; 
save  yourself  for  us,  prytanis ;  excellent  is  your  rule.' "  He  then  tried  to  resign 
at  the  end  of  his  term  of  office.  "  The  prytanis  said  :  '  The  law  commands  us  that 
the  coming  prytanis  should  be  nominated  six  months  beforehand,  I  remind  you.' 
The  senators  said:  'The  nomination  is  made  with  a  resolution.'  The  pry tanis said : 
' ....  for  I  have  long  been  ill,  and  have  a  cough  from  my  lung,  as  you  know.' 
The  senators  said  :  '  Illustrious  prytanis,  noble  prytanis,  still  labour  for  us;  labour 
in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  past.'"  All  this  is  much  like  the  acclamations  of  the 
Roman  senate  in  the  Augustan  histories.  "The  gods  continue  Claudius  our 
Emperor  to  us.  This  was  repeated  sixty  times.  We  have  always  wished  to  have 
Claudius  to  be  our  Emperor.  This  was  repeated  forty  times,  etc."  These  repeti- 
tions probably  mean  the  number  of  senators  who  joined  in  the  shout,  for  it  is 
impo.ssible  to  suppose  phrases  said  by  the  same  persons  sixty  times. 

The  burden  of  public  office  was  often  evaded.  "  Two  communications  from  the 
strategus  having  been  read,  one  concerning  the  appointment  of  a  substitute  for 
Actiasion,  convoying  collectors  of  wine,  who  had  absconded,  the  other  concerning 
the  appointment  likewise  of  a  substitute  for  Theon,  senator,  convoying  collectors 
of  barley,  who  had  absconded  ;  after  the  reading  the  prytanis  said :  '  Appoint 
persons  to  do  the  duty  in  order  that  the  carriage  of  the  annona  for  the  most  noble 
soldiers  may  not  be  hindered.'  The  senators  said :  '  Let  them  not  be  nominated 
beforehand  .  .  .  lest  they  run  away.'"  When  one  was  nominated  to  office, 
"  Ptolemaios,  son  of  Damarion,  chief  priest,  said  :  '  I  entreat  you,  I  cannot  serve. 
I  am  a  man  of  moderate  means,  I  live  in  my  father's  house.'  The  prytanis  said  : 
'  Ptolemaios  still  requires  to  be  pressed  by  you,  for  he,  too,  shrinks  from  so  great 
an  office.'  Endaimon,  exegetes,  said  :  '  Ptolemaios,  too,  is  a  man  of  moderate 
means,  and  unable  to  bear  the  burden.'  Ptolemaios,  son  of  Damarion,  said  :  '  The 
office  is  beyond  my  powers.' "  Thus  they  went  on  endeavouring  to  avoid  the  ruin 
which  public  duties  entailed.  Using  influence  was  as  customary  as  it  is  now. 
"  To  my  lord  and  brother  Heras  Ammonios,  centurion,  greeting.  The  bearer  of 
this  letter  is  my  tenant.  He  states  that  he  has  been  appointed  to  a  public  office 
at  the  village  of  Dositheou,  namely,  the  collectorship  of  tunics  and  cloaks,  but  has 
not  yet  been  entrusted  with  the  collection.  Accordingly,  use  all  your  efforts, 
brother,  to  rescue  him  from  the  office,"  etc. 

The  cumbrous  notation  of  years  by  reigns  or  consulships  was  gradually  replaced 
by  fixed  eras  in  the  fourth  century.     As  was  natural,  various  attempts  were  made 


Reviews.  89 

before  general  consent  was  reached.  A  list  of  the  seven  different  eras  used  shows 
the  number  of  instances,  and  practically  they  come  to  two — A.D.  307  and  325. 
Now  these  seem  to  be  the  Pagan  and  Christian  reckonings ;  Licinius,  the  last  of 
the  Pagan  series#t)ecame  emperor  on  nth  November,  307,  and  Constantine  gave  the 
official  triumph  to  Christianity  by  the  Council  of  Nicaea,  May  to  September  325. 
The  editors  note  the  latter,  but  omit  the  Pagan  dating  point.  The  datings  given 
by  horoscopes  prove  of  importance  for  rectifying  the  uncertainties  of  the  period 
from  A.D.  250  to  284.  A  full  discussion  of  the  material  is  given,  which  needs 
tabulation  ;  the  crude  result  is  that  Gallienus  only  reached  his  fifteenth  year,  and 
we  must  allow  a  third  year  to  Claudius  and  a  seventh  to  Aurelius. 

The  lists  of  taxes  show  the  network  which  restrained  enterprise.  The 
individual  paid  his  poll-tax.  On  lands  were  the  State  land  tax,  vineyard  tax, 
garden  tax,  and  bare  land  tax.  On  produce,  the  corn  dues  were  most  important 
as  feeding  Rome ;  pigs,  asses,  trades,  and  specially  cloth  weaving,  were  taxed.  For 
special  officials  there  were  taxes  for  the  desert  guards,  the  prison  guards,  the 
eclogistes  and  the  idiologos.  The  labours  of  embanking  and  of  public  earthworks 
{naubion)  were  commuted  for  money.  The  baths  paid  a  third,  receipts  paid,  and  a 
charge  was  made  for  public  libations.  All  intercourse  with  different  parts  of  the 
country  (as  in  Italy  a  century  ago)  came  under  the  customs  dues  and  an  export 
tax  of  two  per  cent.  Many  other  obscure  taxes  also  appear,  and  emperors  and 
high  officials  had  a  gratuity  in  lieu  of  being  presented  with  a  golden  wreath  on 
taking  office. 

Under  Caracalla  there  is  an  interesting  list  of  the  temples  and  their  property. 
Among  the  gods  is  a  Syrian  Atargatis  Bethennunis,  i.e.,  of  the  "  House  of  the 
Gracious"  or  "Merciful,"  a  title  of  Derketo  there;  probably  this  is  Beit  Hanun, 
2\  miles  N.E.  of  Gaza.  This  is  about  three  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  valley 
which  was  probably  the  fish  pond  sacred  to  Derketo,  behind  Ashkelon,  described 
by  Diodorus  (II,  i).  The  temple  property  was  sometimes  recent,  but  "in  other 
cases  we  are  ignorant  of  the  dedicators,  because  the  offerings  have  been  in  the 
temple  from  antiquity."  We  may  note  a  statue  of  Demeter,  the  bust  of  Parian 
marble,  the  figure  of  wood ;  a  bust  of  Parian  marble  with  amulets  of  plaster ;  of 
gold,  are  sacred  lamps,  ten  armlets  for  a  child,  two  spoons,  one  small  gold  pen  ; 
of  silver,  are  bracelets,  armlets,  a  toy  mirror,  and  lamps.  A  lamp  with  a  statue 
of  Kore  of  unstamped  silver,  weighing  a  pound,  plated  on  wood  ;  a  gold  lamp ;  an 
altar  of  silver  weighing  I  lb.  5^  oz.  ;  a  statuette  of  "  the  most  great  goddess," 
weighing  15  lbs.  In  the  villages  of  the  nome,  at  Sinaru,  a  representation  of 
Caracalla,  Severus  and  Domna,  "  a  dark  red  covering,  decayed  and  useless,  one 
bronze  folding  mirror  in  new  style."  At  Ta  ...  a  representation  of  Caracalla, 
Severus  and  Domna  one  bronze  trencher,  statuettes  of  Zeus  and  Hera.  These 
representations  (iKoveiBiop)  of  the  imperial  family  were  distinct  from  a  statue 
(^oavov)  or  statuettes  (avSpiavrdpia).  They  may  have  been  painted  panels,  like 
the  well-known  portraits,  as  they  were  placed  apparently  in  every  village  of  note. 
This  inventory  gives  a  curious  view  of  the  state  of  the  local  temples  before  they 
were  pillaged. 

An  interesting  document  on  the  independence  of  educated  women,  is  a  petition 
for  the  recognised  rights.  "  Laws  have  been  made,  most  eminent  praefect,  which 
enable  women  who  are  honoured  with  the  right  of  three  children  to  be  independent, 
and  act  without  a  guardian  in  all  business  which  they  transact,  especially  those 
women  who  know  how  to  write.  Accordingly  I,  too,  fortunately  possessing  the 
honour  of  being  blessed  with  children,  and  a  writer  who  am  able  to  write  with  the 


90  Reviews. 

greatest  ease,  in  the  fullness  of  my  security  appeal  to  your  highness,"  etc.  The 
good  lady  was  Aurelia  Thatsous,  also  called  Lolliane ;  she  was  the  daughter  of 
the  clerk  of  the  market,  and  probably  learned  business  in  her  father's  office.  Four 
years  later  she  does  her  own  business  in  buying  back  a  lot  of  family  property, 
which  is  carefully  specified  down  to  "a  tank  in  disrepair,  and  the  water-wheel, 
likewise  partly  in  disrepair,"  specifying  exactly  the  date  of  division  of  taxes  and  of 
produce.     She  then  paid  twelve  drachmae  tax  to  have  the  deed  registered. 

Another  curious  point  of  woman's  law  is,  that  as  the  husband  was  responsible 
for  his  wife's  debts,  the  way  to  clear  up  a  bankruptcy  was  to  divorce  the  wife  with 
her  dowry,  let  her  go  bankrupt  on  her  own  estate,  lend  her  money  to  clear  up  the 
accounts,  and  then  re-marry  her  with  a  pre-nuptial  lien  on  her  property,  in  order 
that,  in  case  of  a  serious  divorce  later,  he  should  not  lose  his  claim  to  repayment. 
The  legitimate  rights  of  their  son  were  duly  guarded  in  the  various  documents. 
Also,  in  case  he  levied  on  her  property,  due  alimony  out  of  it  was  to  be  allowed. 
A  copy  of  the  wife's  declaration  is  included  :  "  As  I  know  how  to  write,  and  am 
making  a  marriage-contract  with  my  former  husband  Horion  .  .  .  . ,  by  the  terms 
of  which  Horion  obtains  security  for  the  sums  which  he  lent  me,"  etc.  This  is 
a  strange  mixture  of  matrimony  and  business,  but  it  shows  what  precautions  are 
needed  in  a  Married  Woman's  Property  Act. 

Lastly,  there  is  a  strange  list  of  questions  to  an  Oracle,  and  a  charm  for  racing 
in  the  name  Sulikusesos,  which  suggests  some  compound  of  the  Celtic  gods  Sulis 
and  Hesos.  Altogether  it  is  a  volume  of  general  interest,  apart  from  the  many 
technical  questions  of  government  and  currency  in  which  it  assists. 

The  Geography  and  Geology  of  West-Central  Sinai.  By  John  Ball,  D.Sc,  etc. 
219  pp.,  54  figures,  24  plates.     8vo.     19 16.     Cairo,  Government  Press,  30  P.T. 

This  volume  is  a  generous  gift  to  science  by  the  Survey  Department,  treating 
a  ver)'  interesting  region  in  detail,  and  providing  a  fine  map,  22  inches  by  27  inches, 
with  minute  hill  shading  and  geological  colouring,  for  the  nominal  price  of  6  shillings. 
To  anyone  who  has  a  feeling  for  the  wildest  of  country,  gorges,  precipices,  the  most 
astonishing  hill  sculpturing,  and  all  bare  to  the  eye  with  dozens  of  ancient  faults 
visible  miles  away,  there  could  be  nothing  more  fascinating  than  to  wander,  map 
in  hand,  climbing  across  the  continual  changes  of  strata.  How  Dr.  Ball  managed 
to  get  over  340  square  miles  of  such  desperate  country  in  about  240  days, 
including  all  the  main  triangulation,  is  surprising.  One  of  the  strangest  feats  was 
keeping  his  field  plotting  sheet  so  clean  through  all  the  work  that  it  could  be 
photographed  for  publication  ;  thus  there  is  none  of  the  usual  office  beautifying, 
but  it  is  all  shown  as  it  appeared  on  the  spot.  It  is  disappointing  that  the  map 
only  just  includes  the  Serabit  temple  without  its  surroundings,  and  just  misses 
Wady  Maghara.  Thus,  the  ancient  sites  will  be  split  up  on  the  boundaries  of  three 
sheets  of  survey. 

Beside  the  maps,  several  sections  across  the  country  are  given,  showing  the 
many  sharp  displacements  of  strata,  sometimes  of  hundreds  of  feet  up  and  down. 
Even  this  does  not  express  what  is  perhaps  the  most  impressive  sight,  cliffs  of 
granite  cracked  across  in  every  direction,  and  each  crack  healed  up  by  a  flow  of 
molten  rock  cementing  it  together.  Perhaps  the  next  most  surprising  sight  is  to 
see  the  tops  of  hills  capped  by  a  flow  of  basalt,  to  know  that  the  outflow  was  not 
before  the  late  Miocene  age,  and  yet  denudation  since  then  has  removed  200  feet 
of  hard  basalt  and  ploughed  out  hundreds  of  feet  of  sandstone  to  form  the  present 
gorges  and  precipices  below  the  basalt. 


Reviews.  91 

The  present  volume  is  divided  into  seven  chapters ;  the  general  description  of 
climate,  life,  geology  and  people  ;  the  methods  of  the  survey ;  a  description  of  the 
valleys ;  a  description  of  the  mountains  ;  the  country  up  to  Suez  ;  the  stratigraphical 
geology  ;  and  tbs  physical  geology.  Most  of  these  chapters  are  well  worth  reading 
by  anyone  with  scientific  interests.  The  methods  of  survey  in  particular  contain 
various  improvements  on  the  usual  practice.  The  description  of  the  features  of  the 
country  is  hardly  of  interest  to  those  who  do  not  know  it ;  but  the  discussion  of  the 
changes  that  the  rocks  have  undergone,  and  the  nature  of  their  weathering,  touches 
many  noticeable  matters.  The  curious  hardening  of  the  surface,  and  decay  inside 
the  stone,  until  it  is  merely  a  hollow  box,  is  very  familiar  in  the  Eocene  limestone 
of  the  Pyramids,  and  is  here  ascribed  to  the  consolidating  action  of  dew.  This, 
however,  will  not  account  for  the  deep  hollows,  almost  caverns,  that  are  seen  in 
the  red  granite,  large  enough  for  several  men  to  stand  in.  Some  further  account 
of  the  gravel  beds  in  the  valleys  would  have  been  welcome,  in  view  of  the  occur- 
rence of  worked  flints  in  them,  and  the  questions  of  the  recent  geological  history 
of  the  region.  The  submersion  to  a  depth  of  800  feet,  shown  by  high  level  gravels 
in  Egypt,  due  probably  to  the  Rissian  glacial  period,  would  have  covered  the  whole 
plain  of  El-Markha  and  filled  the  valley  mouths  for  a  few  miles.  Probably  the 
plain  is  due  to  estuarine  deposit  from  the  valleys,  and  patches  of  high  level  gravel 
might  be  found  in  the  lower  reaches  of  the  valleys.  There  would  be  good  ground 
for  a  palaeologist  to  work  over,  in  searching  the  lower  Sinai  valleys  for  remains  of 
submersion  and  human  work.  When  the  world  is  quiet  again,  there  remains 
fascinating  work  to  be  done  in  Sinai  which  will  be  greatly  helped  by  the  surveys 
and  excellent  maps  in  this  volume. 

Recent  Discoveries  at  Kom  el-Hisn.  By  C.  C.  Edgar.  8  pp.,  5  plates.  191 5. 
{Le Mus^e  ^gyptien.  III,  ii.) 

The  main  paper  of  this  fascicule  having  been  already  discussed  (1916,  p.  114, 
New  Portions  of  the  Annals),  the  present  paper  remains  to  be  noticed.  The  rock 
cliffs  of  Upper  Egypt  have  preserved  most  of  what  we  know  about  the  Middle 
Kingdom,  and  the  flatness  of  the  desert  bordering  the  Delta  has  been  unfavourable 
to  preserving  the  history.  Tombs  must  have  been  constructed,  and  not  rock-hewn, 
and  stone  has  always  been  so  greedily  sought  for  in  the  lower  country  that  what- 
ever is  known  is  certain  to  be  carried  away.  Nine  years  ago  Mr.  Edgar  published 
two  tombs  at  Kom  el-Barnougi,  which  appeared  to  belong  to  the  earlier  part  of  the 
Middle  Kingdom,  but  with  a  strong  influence  of  Old  Kingdom  style  remaining. 
Now  another  tomb  of  the  same  character  is  published,  which  has  been  found  at  the 
great  site  of  Kom  Hisn,  the  western  border  of  the  Delta,  within  sight  of  Naukratis. 

This  tomb  is  a  single  chamber,  168  inches  by  55  inches,  and  TJ  inches  high, 
hardly  more  than  a  shrine  for  the  coffin.  The  burial  had  been  entirely  robbed, 
and  nothing  but  brown  dust  remained.  The  deceased,  Khesu-ur,  held  many 
priestly  offices.  Foremost  of  these  was  his  leadership  of  the  priestesses  of  Hathor. 
Before  him  is  shown  the  choir-master  holding  two  sistra  like  battledores,  beating 
time  for  the  ten  khenru,  sistrum  bearers  of  Hathor.  Next  is  shown  the  choir- 
master clapping  his  hands,  leading  the  ten  neferut  or  singers  of  Hathor.  The 
choir-master  is  entitled  Dua-khesu  "  the  striker  of  adoration,"  that  is,  the  rattler  of 
the  sistrum  ;  and  this  explains  the  name  of  the  deceased,  which  is  variously  written 
Khesu-ur  and  Dua-khesu-ur,  or  Dua-khesu-oa,  that  is,  the  "  chief  striker  "  or  sistrum 
player.     As  he  was  mer,  overseer,  of  the  khenru  and  of  the  neferut^  it  is  obvious 


92  Reviews. 

that  these  are  the  two  classes  of  sistrum  players  and  of  singers  shown  before  him. 
The  neferut  were  the  inferior  class,  probably  girls  whose  voices  were  good,  and 
who,  when  older,  might  be  raised  to  sistrum  players.  Other  titles  were  mer  neter 
lunu,  overseer  of  the  prophets ;  sehez  neter  henu,  illuminator  or  instructor  of  the 
prophets  ;  mer  neter  hat,  overseer  of  the  temple ;  Asar  neb  zedu  neter  hen,  prophet 
of  Osiris  of  Zedu  ;  vieti  en  sa,  priest  (imparter  of  the  sa  influence  ?) ;  neter  mer, 
beloved  of  the  god,  and  some  other  less  clear  titles.  The  variant  of  the  name, 
ending  in  ur  or  oa,  both  meaning  great,  should  be  remarked.  There  can  be  no 
question  of  the  vocalisation  ur,  as  it  is  written  with  the  bird  and  mouth.  A  some- 
what similar  variation  occurs  on  the  XVIIth  dynasty  ushabtis  variously  written 
Teta-on  (with  the  eye),  or  Teta-re.s. 

The  scenes  in  the  tomb  are  the  traditional  subjects  of  ploughing  and  harvesting, 
catching  birds  with  a  clap  net,  the  master  harpooning  two  fish  and  fowling  with 
a  throw-stick,  the  cutting  up  of  offerings,  and  the  tending  of  cattle. 

A  head  of  a  royal  statue  in  basalt  was  found  thrown  into  the  plundered  tomb. 
It  is  somewhat  like  Amenemhat  III,  but  more  forcible.  It  is  too  pinched  in 
the  face  for  Senusert  II  or  III.  It  might  be  of  Amenemhat  II  or  IV.  It  is  an 
interesting  addition  to  the  portraits  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  and  whenever  we  have 
a  complete  portraiture  of  the  kings  compiled,  we  may  hope  to  fix  its  origin. 

Bulletin  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York.  Monthly,  lo  cents. 
May,  1916. 

This  well-illustrated  record  of  work  and  acquisitions  is  always  welcome. 
What  a  gain  in  public  interest  it  would  be  if  our  national  museums  were  equally 
communicative  1  In  this  number  are  seven  views,  two  figures,  and  a  plan  of  the 
excavations  to  the  south  of  the  pylon  of  Rameses  III  at  Medinet  Habu.  The 
stretch  of  dusty  heaps  leading  away  to  the  ruins  of  the  Coptic  town  were  suspected 
by  Maspero  to  cover  some  remains  of  buildings,  and  he  proposed  that  the  Davis 
excavations  should  be  transferred  to  this  region.  The  site  proved  to  have  been 
greatly  denuded ;  nothing  remained  over  five  feet  high,  and  the  brick  walls  had 
been  entirely  removed.  Three  stone  baths  have  been  found,  and  a  dais  with  one 
ascent  of  steps,  and  another  dais  with  three  flights  of  steps.  Of  the  upper  parts  of 
the  building  are  three  stone  grilles  for  windows,  with  the  cartouches  of  Rameses  III 
placed  between  hawk  supporters. 

These  bath  rooms  and  the  throne-dais  seem  to  mark  this  building  as  a  palace  of 
the  king,  adjoining  his  great  temple.  The  temple  proper  could  not  be  inhabited,  and 
the  tower  entrance  was  but  a  gateway  in  the  great  temenos  wall,  and  would  lead 
equally  to  the  temple  and  to  the  palace  or  other  buildings  within  the  temenos. 
It  is  hoped  that  further  clearance  here  may  explain  the  plan  of  the  building. 

Bulletin,  November,  1916.  "Ancient  Egyptian  Kerchiefs"  gives  an  account  of 
certain  oval  cloths,  with  tapes  sewn  on  them,  which  were  found  in  a  tomb  in  the 
Valley  of  the  Kings,  of  the  time  of  Tutonkhamen.  A  study  of  these  has  now 
shown  Mr.  Winlock  how  they  were  used.  The  ends  of  the  tape  were  tied  behind 
the  head  and  the  cloth  thrown  back  over  them ;  in  such  a  position  it  would  exactly 
cover  one  of  the  full  wigs  which  were  worn  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  The  dusty 
climate  of  Egypt  made  a  covering  very  necessary  for  the  hair ;  an  oiled  wig,  after 
a  dusty  day,  must  have  been  a  sorry  sight.  Having  this  pattern  of  one  form  of 
wig  cover,  Mr.  Winlock  proceeded  to  plan  the  other  forms  of  head-coverings  that 
are  known.  He  restores  the  khat  commonly  worn  by  working  women,  which 
was  adopted  as  the  regular  type  on  figures  of  Isis  and  Nebhat.     The  Arab  and 


Reviews.  93 

modern  Egyptian  custom  of  women  always  wearing  a  shawl  or  wrap  over  the  head 
is  similarly  as  a  protection  of  the  hair  from  dust  and  dirt.  Another  headdress, 
also  here  restored,  is  the  striped  nemes,  which  is  shown  to  be  similarly  a  covering 
for  the  wig.  It  is  notable  how  these  various  headdresses  all  arose  from  the 
utility  of  a  covering  for  the  hair,  natural  or  artificial.  There  has  also  been  a 
suspicion  that  the  khepesh  headdress  was  a  leather  case  to  cover  the  double  crown 
of  Egypt ;  if  so,  originally,  it  became  later  worn  alone  as  a  substitute  for  the  crown, 
much  like  the  dummy  swords  still  worn  in  court  dress. 

In  the  B-ulletin,  January,  1917,  is  an  illustration  of  a  limestone  face  of  a  woman, 
which  is  assigned  to  the  XXXth  dynasty.  The  style  would  rather  suggest  an 
earlier  date — before  the  archaistic  work  of  the  Saites.  It  is  only  a  face  and  neck, 
without  any  back  or  top  to  the  head,  and  is  hollowed  out  at  the  back ;  it  seems, 
therefore,  as  if  it  were  a  sculptor's  study  from  life,  ready  for  use  by  a  statuary. 
Two  such  life  studies  are  in  University  College,  of  Narmer  and  of  a  Roman. 

Declaration  (fun  Domaine  Royal. — A.  MORET.  {Comptes  Rendus  Acad. 
Inscrip.,  1916,  pp.  318-333.) 

This  is  a  careful  study  of  a  group  of  three  documents  of  the  reign  of  Pepy  II, 
referring  to  a  single  property  at  Koptos.  Two  of  these  were  found  by  Capt.  Weill 
(but  were  misattributed  to  the  Vlllth  dynasty),  the  third  was  bought  by  M.  Moret 
at  Thebes.  One  of  these  found  by  Capt.  Weill  was  incomplete,  but  has  been 
restored  from  parallel  passages,  here  in  ellipses.  This  earliest  stela  may  be 
translated  thus: — I.  "(The  Horus  Neterkhou,  year  x.  Royal  decree  for  the 
director  of  the  pyramid  town,  judge  of  the  Gate,  vi)zir,  prince,  director  of  the 
South,  director  of  the  scribes  of  the  domain  {jietu)  of  Koptos,  of  the  nomes  of 
Nekheb  (III),  Dendereh  (VI),  Panopolis  (IX),  Abydos  (VIII),  Hierakonpolis  (XII), 
Lycopolis  (XIII),  and  Cusae  (?)  (XIV),  Shemaa.  (The  temple  of  Min  in)  Koptos 
of  the  Two  Falcons.  The  royal  offering  of  the  statue  of  the  king  of  the  South  and 
of  the  North  Neferkara  maa-khrou,  which  he  (the  king)  has  given  to  his  (the  god's) 
endowment,  is  established  in  the  Palace  (unto  eternity)  by  the  order  and  on 
account  of  the  king  of  the  South  and  North,  Neferkara,  living  in  time  and  to 
€ternity,  to-day  renewed  : — that  is  of  fields  3  aruras  in  the  two-falcon  (city  of  Koptos. 
This  is  constituted  by  writing  in  the)  office,  sealed  with  a  seal,  signed  by  many 
hands.  The  offering  is  specified  in  the  register  in  these  terms :  composed  of 
fields,  vineyards,  orchards,  (gardens  with  excellent  things  of  all  sorts)  in  them. 
Their  name  has  been  given  as  'Domain  Min-prosper-the-domain-of-Neferkara,' 
in  the  office  of  agriculture.  The  corv^es  are  settled  at  the  same  time,  and  the 
serfs  are  raised  for  this  farm  among  the  serfs  (who  are  in  the  South  for  doing  the 
service)  of  all  the  requirements  and  corvees  of  the  Palace ;  he  who  may  not  know 
his  previous  tenure  will  have  his  duty  settled  by  declaration  of  the  notables. 

II.  "Go,  then,  (to  the  country,  descend  to)  the  field  to  establish  the  divine 
offering  there,  in  daily  portions  of  each  day,  and  more  for  offerings  of  feasts  (which 
exist  already  in  the   temple   of  Min  of  Koptos  of  the)  Two  Falcons ;    for  it  is 

established  for  the  statue  of  Neferkara  maa-khrou — in  bronze  of  Asia  (1  | 

bordered    I  ^5  .Sai  v:>)    with   gold — brought   to   this    temple — for    daily   service. 

(Make  therefore  a  contract  with  the  hour-priests  of)  this  temple,  that  the  corvees 
be  established  at  once,  and  the  declaration  made  to  the  people  who  are  at 
disposal  of  the  authority  there,  by  the  levy  of  the  prince,  sole  friend,  sacrificer 
of  Min,  director  of  the  prophets,  Ada,  in  Koptos  of  the  Two  Falcons. 


94  Reviews. 

III.  "(As  there  is  made  for  him  truly  a  decree)  for  him  to  make  declaration 
of  the  fields  in  the  office  of  agriculture,  with  the  chiefs  and  managers  of  the 
domains,  and  the  serfs  of  the  fields,  adding  thereto  the  offering  of  pigeons,  (and  of 
geese,  and  the  slaughter  of  oxen  and  of  birds)  as  it  is  established  for  the  high 
feast  of  the  god.  And  it  is  the  prince,  sole  friend,  sacrificer  of  Min,  director 
of  the  prophets,  A^^a,  who  is  director  of  the  office  of  agriculture  (of  this  domain 
Min-prosper-Neferkara  in)  Koptos  (of  the  Two  Falcons).  In  what  concerns 
you,  put  the  people  of  the  king  in  this  office  of  agriculture  under  his  authority, 
and  see  that  they  are  governed  by  this  declaration  in  the  country " 

These  three  declarations  are  of  different  effect ;  the  first  is  to  the  vizir  and 
nomarch,  stating  the  endowment  for  the  statues  is  specified  in  the  registers ;  the 
second  is  to  the  director  of  the  temple  to  organise  the  service  of  the  statue ;  the 
third  is  authorising  him  to  take  trust  of  the  land  of  the  endowment  and  manage  it. 
All  of  the  official  terms  here  are  paralleled  in  the  Greek  bureaucracy  of  the  late 
times. 

Of  the  next  decree  the  beginning  is  lost.  It  refers  to  the  separation  of  the 
endowment  land  from  the  royal  property,  and  its  being  attached  permanently  to 
the  temple  endowments:  "My  Majesty  has  not  permitted  any  perpetual  charge 
to  be  made,  and  My  Majesty  will  not  any  more  claim  by  the  director  of  the 
South  Land  or  any  noble,  on  this  domain  Min-prosper-the-building-of-Neferkara." 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  reserved  to  the  temple,  and  under  its  protection. 

"  Every  director  of  the  South,  every  noble,  every  messenger,  every  scribe,  if  he 
does  not  conform  to  the  words  of  this  decree  of  the  hall  of  Horus  (the  king)  and  of 
the  authority  of  the  registers.  My  Majesty  will  not  allow  him  to  be  a  priest  of  the 
pyramid  Men-onkh,  nor  of  any  domain  under  his  authority.  And  My  Majesty 
has  ordered  setting  up  a  mast  of  foreign  wood  in  this  new  town  {i.e.,  the  decreed 
domain) ;  My  Majesty  has  ordered  that  this  decree  should  be  placed  on  a  white 
stone  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  Min  in  Koptos.  This  decree  is  also  for  the 
director  of  the  labourers  of  this  domain,  and  for  the  director  of  the  office  of 
agriculture,  for  the  sons  of  their  sons  and  the  heirs  of  their  heirs.  My  Majesty  has 
sent  the  sole  friend  Ada  on  this  matter." 

The  mast  of  foreign  wood  is  supposed  by  M.  Moret  to  be  of  cedar  of  Lebanon. 
Rather  it  might  be  a  straight  fir  pole,  like  the  maypole  in  a  village  of  the  West. 
Was  not  this  the  emblem  of  a  village  or  "  new  town  "  ?  Was  not  the  right  to  a 
centre  of  rustic  worship  and  festivity  the  mark  of  an  independent  community,  not 
subject  to  municipal  claims  of  any  neighbouring  town  ?  In  England,  the  maypoles 
were  called  by  the  Puritans  the  "idols"  of  the  people,  and  Pasquil,  in  1634  wrote: 
"  Where  every  village  did  a  maypole  raise." 

Some  years  later  a  third  decree  renewed  the  rights  of  this  endowment.  It  has 
been  fully  published  by  Capt.  Weill,  and  is  summarised  by  M.  Moret.  The  decree 
is  likewise  of  Pepy  II.  It  directs  the  royal  agents  to  define  their  relation  with 
the  serfs  of  the  new  domain  established  to  furnish  the  daily  offerings  to  the  statue. 
These  people  are  reserved  anew  to  the  temple  of  Min,  and  freed  from  the  corvee 
due  to  the  Palace.  The  various  dues  claimed  on  the  royal  estates  are  enumerated 
in  order  to  specify  that  they  cannot  be  claimed  from  these  serfs,  who  now  belong 
to  the  service  of  Min.  The  dues  are  in  two  classes,  mezeru,  the  taxes  literally 
wrung  from  the  people  like  wine  from  a  twisted  cloth  wine-press,  and  Mtit, 
public  works.  The  taxes  were  charges  on  goods  due  to  the  treasury,  and  taxes  on 
the  place ;  levies  by  the  viceroy  of  the  South ;  contributions  of  gold,  silver,  and 
common  metals ;  supplies  of  material  to  the  registry  office ;  food  dues  of  baskets 


Reviews.  95 

of  vegetables,  eatables,  fodder  and  bread  ;  perhaps,  also,  cordage  and  linen  yarn. 
All  of  these  taxes  in  kind  are  known  at  the  other  end  of  the  history,  in  late  papyri ; 
so,  probably,  they  were  claimed  at  all  times.  The  public  works,  corvees,  were 
cultivation  of  njyal  lands,  harvesting  and  various  works,  doubtless  including 
canals  and  embankments,  as  in  modern  times.  Lastly,  there  is  the  charge  of 
"  passage  by  land  and  water,"  the  claim  for  beast  and  boat  in  the  king's  service, 
which  has  been  usual  in  most  countries.  Probably  the  e.xactions  in  the  temple 
service  were  not  so  heavy,  and  so  the  people  claimed  protection  from  the  squeezing 
by  royal  officials.  These  decrees  give  valuable  light  on  the  administrative  system, 
and  the  close  parallel  with  the  Ptolemaic  and  Roman  customs  show  how  long 
continued  was  this  taxation,  which  eventually  ruined  the  country  when  applied 
for  the  benefit  of  the  absentee  landlord,  the  Roman  Emperor. 

Le  Sinai  et  I'Exode. — GUSTAVE  JEQUIER  {Revue  de  thMogie  et  de  philosophie). 
1916.     (Lausanne.) 

This  is  a  review  of  the  work  of  Prof  Cart,  of  Neuchatel,  on  his  Expedition  to 
Sinai ;  popular  in  the  first  part,  and  discussing  historical  problems  in  the  second 
part.  The  conclusion  of  the  author  is  that  the  original  record  described  Moses  as 
leading  Israel  to  Qedesh,  and  that  later  the  account  of  Sinai  was  substituted. 
This  point  of  view  seems  to  contradict  all  we  know  of  the  veneration  of  holy 
places.  If  Qedesh  was  the  root  of  all  the  sacred  traditions  and  history  of  the 
people,  why  should  they  entirely  neglect  it  and  transfer  their  history  to  a  remote 
district  of  which  they  had  no  reason  to  know  anything  at  all  ?  It  seems  contrary 
to  common  sense,  as  well  as  to  many  documents,  to  suppose  such  an  inversion. 

Another  conclusion  of  Prof.  Cart  is  that  the  Israelites  divided  into  two  parts, 
one  of  which  went  into  Egypt  while  the  rest  were  in  Moab.  The  Egyptian 
portion  then  entered  Canaan  from  the  south,  while  the  eastern  portion  came  across 
the  Jordan,  and  were  the  Khabiru  under  Amenhetep  IV.  They  only  became 
united  under  David  and  Solomon,  and  soon  broke  apart  again.  There  is  much  to 
be  said  for  a  division  of  Israel,  but  the  record  points  to  their  reunion  before  the 
entry  into  Canaan,  during  some  twenty  years  in  Moab. 

Les  dessins  des  vases  prMstoriques  igyptiens. — E.  Naville  {Archives  Suisses 
d' Antkropologie  generate).     1916-1917.     (Geneve.) 

In  this  paper  Prof.  Naville  repeats  his  views  as  to  the  boats  on  the  vases  being 
drawings  of  stockaded  forts.  He  first  debates  the  meaning  of  the  wavy  lines  on 
these  vases  (see  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1916,  p.  34),  proposing  that  they  do  not  represent 
water,  but  ripples  on  sand  dunes.  They  really  represent  neither,  but  the  cordage 
in  which  stone  vases  were  carried ;  the  proof  of  this  is  when  they  run  diagonally, 
crossing  from  top  to  bottom  of  a  vase. 

As  to  the  boats,  the  critical  examples  must  be  examined  ;  they  are  ignored  in 
this  paper.  In  the  first  number  of  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1914,  p.  32,  are  the  figures 
of  an  unquestionable  boat  with  a  man  at  the  steering  oar,  and  the  figure  of  a  boat 
from  a  vase  with  three  great  steering  oars.  The  cabins  are  alike  on  both,  it  would 
be  impossible  to  deny  their  connection.  The  new  carved  ivory  from  Gebel  el-Arak 
(Ancient  Egypt,  1917,  p.  27),  shows  boats  of  the  same  general  form,  with  cabins. 
There  is  no  ground  whatever  for  removing  some  of  these  boats  to  the  category  of 
land  forts. 

The  so-called  aloes  on  the  vases  are  explained  by  a  Bantu  custom  of  having 
a  village  tree  to  which  offerings  are  made  in  a  vase. 


96 


NOTES   AND   NEWS. 


We  have  received  from  Mr.  Willey  the  following  translation  of  Monsieur  P^zard's 
report  of  May,  1913,  on  excavations  about  a  mile  from  the  British  Residency  at 
Bushire : — 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  report  that  the  mission  entrusted  to  me  by  the  French 
Government,  and  which  I  have  directed  with  the  assistance  of  my  brother, 
Lieut.  G.  P^zard,  has  just  terminated,  and  before  leaving  Bushire,  I  should  like  to 
bring  to  your  notice  the  main  results  : — 

"The  hill  close  to  Sabzabad  was  occupied  at  a  very  ancient  period  and  the 
most  modern  documents  found  on  the  top  of  the  hill  date  from  the  middle  of  the 
Elamite  epoch  (about  1,100  years  B.C.),  and  consist  chiefly  of  inscribed  bricks 
belonging  to  a  construction  of  the  Kings  Shanterank  Nukhanti,  Kantir  Nukhanti, 
and  Shilkhat-in-Shanshinak,  kings  of  Anzar  and  Susa.  The  texts  are  common  to 
temple  buildings  built  in  these  regions,  and  chiefly  at  Susa,  and  mention  especially 
the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess  Kirinsha.  The  row  of  stones  found  on  the  same 
plane  and  below  the  Elamite  monument  would  appear  to  have  formed  part  of  the 
walls  of  the  building.  A  plan  has  been  drawn  up  so  far  as  subsequent  treatment 
and  excavations  previous  to  the  French  Mission  render  it  possible.  Besides  the 
inscribed  bricks,  the  Elamite  epoch  is  represented  at  Bushire  by  numerous  frag- 
ments of  clay  vases,  some  specimens  of  stone  vases,  arms  made  of  brass  and  of 
stones  and  some  rings  and  pearls. 

"  Below  the  Elamite  level  and  as  far  as  the  bottom  of  the  hill  which  is  cut  in 
two  by  our  trench  some  50  metres  long  and  8*50  deep,  the  excavations  have 
brought  to  light  a  large  number  of  fragments  of  diff'erent  vases  of  which  one  is 
more  than  i  metre  in  height  and  is  complete.  The  vases  decorated  by  the  designs 
'of  the  II  style'  are  more  numerous  at  this  level  than  above.  The  arms  and  stone 
tools  are  also  very  numerous,  but  there  only  remain  traces  of  metal  utensils.  In 
the  very  complete  report  which  we  have  drawn  up  there  figure  numerous  types 
of  cut  flints  (arrow  heads,  scrapers,  etc.)  and  some  polished  axes  from  the  neolithic 
epoch.  It  may  be  said  that  this  part  of  the  hill  covers  the  most  ancient  civilisation 
which  has  existed  at  Bushire. 

"  The  map  of  the  hill  and  of  the  more  recent  Arab  and  Portuguese  ruins 
which  exist  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Subzabad  has  been  prepared  by  Lieut.  Pezard. 
Lastly,  numerous  specimens  of  shell-fish  and  bones  have  also  been  found  in  the 
course  of  excavations  in  the  hill. 

"  If  our  work  shows  little  result  from  the  artistic  point  of  view,  it  is  full 
otherwise  when  viewed  from  the  scientific  side.  Thanks  to  our  excavations,  it  is 
possible  to  form  a  rough  idea  of  the  successive  civilisations  which  this  part  of  the 
island  has  seen." 

Mr.  Guy  Brunton  is  now  in  the  Durham  Light  Infantry,  working  in  France 
with  the  8th  Labour  Company.  Capt.  Engelbach,  R.E.,  is  shortly  to  move  from 
Newhaven.     Mr.  Lawrence  is  with  the  sons  of  the  Sherif  of  Mecca. 


^n 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


A  NEW  KINGDOM  POTTER'S  MARK. 

In  October,  1916,  I  was  fortunate  in  buying  for  3  piastres  (/W.)  at  el-Arabah 
(Abydos)  the  pot  here  illustrated.  It  is  of  a  well  known  style,  very  typical  of  the 
early  XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  perhaps  running  back  into  the  period  intermediate 
between  the  Middle  and  New  Kingdoms.'  The  pot  is  ornamented  with  a  varietj' 
of  the  decoration  common  on  this  class,  which  is  done  in  the  usual  dark  purplish- 
brown  paint.  It  is  a  rather  coarsely  made  specimen,  but  its  clay  is  of  that  fine 
quality  which  varies  from  drab  to  red,  and  of  which  these  pots  are  generally  made. 
In  this  ca.se  the  clay  has  turned  rather  red.  Thus,  in  every  way  it  is  a  very  ordinary 
pot  of  the  period  stretching  from  the  seventeenth  to  the  fifteenth  centuries  li.C, 
except  that  in  one  of  the  panels  it  bears  a  group  of  two  signs,  C  B,  quite  clearly 
written,  and  in  precisely  the  same  dark  purplish-brown  paint  as  that  in  which  the 
decoration  is  done.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  these  signs  are  of  the  same 
date  as  the  pot  itself,  yet  the\'  at  once  call  to  mind  letters  from  the  classical 
alphabets  of  a  date  later  by  many  centuries  than  those  to  which  our  pot  is 
assignable. 

Of  this  curiously  late  style  other  signs  have  been  found  at  Tell  el-Yahudiyeh, 
inci.sed  as  potters'  marks  on  the  backs  of  faience  tiles  for  inlaying  on  walls,  as  were 
a  number  of  hieroglyphs,  and  also  other  signs  of  a  purely  fanciful  form.  Their  first 
appearance  not  unnaturall}-  led  their  discoverer  to  speak  of  them  as  "lettres 
grecques,"  and  to  think  that  the  tiles  were  "probablement  aux  temps  des  Ptolem^es."- 
Prof.  Hayter  Lewis''  also  calls  them  "Greek  letters,"  and,  on  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Chester,  .says  that  "  tiles  of  the  same  kind,  also  with  Greek  letters  at  the  back, 
are  in  the  Louvre  Collection,  having  been  brought  back  from  Assyria."  Later, 
however,  Mr.  Griffith*  considered  "  that  they  (the  tiles)  are  natural  representatives 
of  Ramesside  work,"  and  since  then  tiles  of  various  classes  have  come  to  light  in 
Egypt  of  various  periods  back  to  the  earliest  dynastic  times ;  so  that  .so  far  as  the 
tiles  themselves  are  concerned,  there  is  no  need  to  doubt  that  they  are  of  the  date 
of  Rame.ses  III,  i.e.,  early  twelfth  century  B.C.  There  can  also  be  no  doubt  that 
the  "  Greek  letters "  which  they  bore  are  also  of  this  date,  for  here  we  have 
other  signs  of  the  same  class  on  a  pot  several  centuries  earlier,  i.e.,  seventeenth 
to  fifteenth  centuries  B.Ci  The  "  Greek  letters "  on  these  Ramesside  tiles  were 
EAIAMOCTX.  Of  the  two  on  our  pot,  one,  the  B,  does  not  occur  in  this 
Tell  el-Yahudiyeh  list,  though  known  elsewhere  at  about  the  same  period  of  history, 
i.e.,  in  the  XlXth  dyna.sty  or  thirteenth  century  B.C." 

The.se  signs  no  doubt  belong  to  that  group  of  pot  marks  which  Prof.  Petrie 
has  discovered  in  Egypt  from  time  to  time,  and  of  which  many  forms  run  right 
back  to  early  predynastic  times.     He  has  recently  collected  together"  those  forms 

G 


98 


A  New  Kingdom  Potters  Mark. 


which  are  similar  to,  or  identical  with  forms  of  letters  occurring  in  the  syllabaries 
and  alphabets  of  other  countries  and  other  times.  While  examples  of  some  of 
these,  such  as  Nos.  i,  4,  18,  25,  27,  33,  39,  41,  47,  48,  are  remarkably  like  the 
shapes  the  Greek  letters  had  assumed  by  classical  times,  the  great  majority  of 
them  are  not  of  the  classical,  but  of  the  pre-classical  and  barbarian  forms.  On 
extracting  from  Petrie's  plates  those  forms  which  resemble  the  classical,  and 
adding  those  from  Tell  el-Yahudiyeh  and  our  own  two,  we  obtain  the  following 
table :— 


Letter. 

E.P. 

L.H. 

I. 

Xll. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

A 

I 

I 



I 

I 



Y 

E 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4 

— 

Y 

1 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

— 

Y 

0 

9 

9 

9 

— 

9 

— 

Y 

B 

— 

— 

— 

>3 

• 

13 

— 

♦ 

18 

18 

IS 

18 

— 

18 

— 

C 

— 

— 

21 

21 

• 

21 

Y 

H 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

— 

— 

X 

27 

— 

27 

27 

— 

27 

Y 

A 

11 

33 

33 

33 

11 

33 

— 

T 

— 

— 

39 

— 

39 

— 

Y 

A 

— 

41 

41 

41 

— 

— 

Y 

N 

— 

— 

47 

47 

— 

— 

P 

— 

48 

— 

48 

— 

— • 

M 

— 



— 

— 

— 

Y 

15 

7 

7 

10 

10 

II 

5 

9 

In  this  table  E.P.  is  early  pre-historic,  L.P.  late  pre-historic,  and  the  numbers 
I  to  XX  refer  to  dynasties.  The  numbers  placed  in  the  columns  are  those  attached 
to  the  sign  in  the  plates  of  The  Formation  of  the  Alphabet.  The  two  spots  are  the 
marks  here  published  ;  the  Y  represents  the  signs  from  Tell  el-Yahudiyeh. 

The  classical  forms  of  the  following  seven  out  of  the  above  fifteen  letters  had 
already  come  into  use  in  quite  early  Greek  times :- — ' 


8th  cent. 

7th  cent. 

625-575 

T 

A 

B 

1 

P 

0 

•  ♦ 

X 

but  the  C  of  our  pot  does  not  come  into  use  for  <t  until  quite  late,  310  K.C.,  and  not 
into  regular  use  until  130  B.C.*  It  should  therefore  rather  be  compared  with  the  C 
of  the  early  local  Greek  alphabet.s,  where  it  was  employed,  not  for  a,  but  for  7  as 
early  as  the  sixth  century.* 


A  Neiv  Kingdom  Potter's  Mark. 


99 


Prof.  Hayter  Lewis'  reference  to  the  finding  of  potters'  marl<s  of  a  similar 
class  in  Assj-ria  seems  worth  following  up,  as  such  an  enquiry  would  no  doubt 
extend  the  area  over  which  this  group  of  signs  is  known  to  have  been  used. 


Painted  Jar  with  Potter's  Mark. 
Abydos.  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

References. 

'  Peet,  Cemeteries  of  Abydos,  II.  p.  69. 

•  E.  Brugsch,  Rec.  de  Trav.,  VIII  (1886),  p.  5. 

■■'  Hayter  Lewis,  Trans.  S.B.A.,  VII  (1881),  pp.  182,  188. 

♦  Griffith,  Tell  el-  Yahudieh  (1890),  p.  41. 

'"  Petrie,  Formation  of  the  Alphabet,  PI.  II,  No.  13. 

*  Petrie,  Formation  of  the  Alphabet,  Pis.  I  to  V. 

^  Larfeld,  Handbuch  der  griechischen  Epigraphik,  II,  Tafel  II,  at  the  end  of 
the  volume.  See  also  Tafel  III  at  the  end  of  Vol.  I,  where  some  are  found  even 
earlier  in  the  local  alphabets. 

"  Larfeld  II,  Taf.  III. 

«  Larfeld  I,  Taf  III. 

G.  A.  Wainwright. 


G  2 


(      lOO      ) 


THE   VOLUME   OF   THE   TRUNCATED    PYRAMID   IN 
EGYPTIAN    MATHEMATICS. 

In  the  collection  formerly  belonging  to  Mr.  Golenistsheff  and  recently  acquired 
by  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  in  Moscow,  there  is  a  Mathematical  Papyrus  of 
thirty-six  columns,  in  hieratic  writing  of  the  epoch  of  the  late  Middle  Empire. 
Paleographically  it  is  like  some  of  the  Illahun  papyri,  whilst  the  breadth  of  its 
leaves  brings  it  near  to  the  MSS.  of  Sinuhe,  found  in  the  Ramesseum.  This 
papyrus  contains  nineteen  problems,  some  of  which  give  us  new  types  of  calculation 
unknown  till  now,  and  therefore  somewhat  difficult  to  comprehend.  Four  of  these 
problems  are  geometrical  ones.  The  first  shows  how  to  define  the  length  of  the 
sides  of  a  quadrilateral,  when  the  relation  of  the  sides  and  the  area  of  the  quadri- 
lateral are  known.  The  two  next  give  a  method  of  calculating  the  area  of  a 
triangle:  a  method  already  known  to  us.  The  fourth  presents  us,  I  am  inclined  to 
think,  with  something  altogether  new  in  Egyptian  .scientific  literature. 

This  is  the  transcription  of  the  XXth  and  XXIst  columns  of  the  papyrus  : — 


XX.    (^ 


CS.  (rubr.) 


I      I      I 


•§'  IL 


I  I  I    ir* 


I  I  I 


Mil 


>JT' 


7^ 


I  I 


I  I  I 
I  I  I 


I  II  I 


I  I  I  I 

nil 


-(S:^  <:Z=> -<25>-  D 


A 


I  II 


XXI. 


I  I  I 
I  I  I 


INI 


III 


^  ®  n 


mill 

Mil 


<=>       1 1 1 

III  III 


I  I 


<E>-' 


n  nil 
n  UN 


nn  III  <=> 

"  II 

nnniii    1 1 1 


^..&   ®     nn  II 
n  MM  a  o     w  <=»nnniii 


llvMIII 

nn  III 

1 

nnniii 

AH 


UN  •  nil 

111^  ""  _^n  nil 
III'  iin^^^n  nil 


ong. 


Tlu  Volume  of  the  Truncated  Pyramid  in  Egyptian  Mathematics. 


lOI 


This  is  the  translation  of  the  problem  : — 

"  The  problem  is  to  make  a  /I\  .  If  it  be  said  :'....  4  below,  2  above,'  do 
as  follows :  sqttjre  this  4,  which  gives  16 ;  duplicate  4,  which  gives  8.  Do  as 
follows  :  square  the  2,  which  gives  4.  Add  the  16  to  the  8  and  the  4,  which  gives 
28.  Do  as  follows :  take  ^  of  6,  which  gives  2.  Do  as  follows :  take  28  twice, 
which  gives  56.     This  is  the  56.     You  will  find  it  correct." 

Leaving  aside  for  a  while  some  rather  obscure  points  in  our  problem,  let  us 
try  to  define  its  main  object.  The  sketch  represents  a  trapezium,  but  the 
calculations  do  not  answer  to  our  definition  of  the  area  of  a  trapezium,  nor  to  the 


Calculation  of  Volume  of  Truncated  Pyramid. 
Xllth  dynasty. 

Egyptian  one.  On  the  contrary,  they  wholly  correspond  to  our  calculations  of  the 
volume  of  a  truncated  pyramid.  Our  formula  for  it :  |  (A  +  Ai  +  v/AAi),  where 
A  and  Ai  represent  the  area  of  the  upper  and  under  base  and  h  is  the  height, 
wholly  corresponds  to  the  solution  of  the  Egyptian  problem.  In  fact,  the  area  of 
the  upper  base  in  the  latter  is  2  x  2  =  4,  the  area  of  the  under  base  is  4  x  4  =  16 ; 
v/4  X  16  =  8;  //  is  6.  Placing  these  numbers  in  our  formula  we  get :  f  (4  +  16  + 
8)  =  56.  The  Egyptian  mathematician  follows  the  same  method  ;  we  only  do  not 
understand  how  he  came  to  define  the  mean  proportional  area ;  it  can  be  only 

empirically.     The  term  |i  o  *|     ^  ^  ^,  which  we  met  here  for  the  first  time, 

G  3 


102  The  Volume  of  the  Truncated  Pyramid  tn  Egyptian  Mathematics. 

is  also  incomprehensible,  and  its  occurring  in  some  other  passages  of  our  papyrus 
does  not  add  much  to  its  explanation,  such  as  the  passage  in  XXVII :    w 

I  ci     jT"    Nliv  .,  3r>  etc.     We  must  note  also  the  term  ^v   A  ,  "make  in 

going,"  for  squaring  a  number. 

If  only  our  explanation  of  the  problem  be  right,  we  have  here  a  new  and 
interesting  fact,  z>.,  the  presence  in  Egyptian  mathematics  of  a  problem  that  is  not 
to  be  found  in  Euclid. 

B.   TOURAEFF. 

[In  comparing  the  Egyptian  with  the  modern  formula,  where  we  write  v^AAi 
or  ^ aa  bb,  the  Egyptian  took  the  simpler  form  a  x  b. — El).] 


(     «03     ) 


I 


THE    GOD    SOFT. 

The  pantheon  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  included  certain  gods  who  were  of  non- 
Egyptian  origin,  but  who  were  given  a  place  by  the  side  of  the  older  local  divinities 
under  the  influence  of  the  syncretism  that  went  with  the  settlement  of  other  people 
in  the  country.  Among  these  gods  was  Sopt,  or  Sopdu,  a  name  written  with  the 
sign  of  a  cone  and  a  mummified  hawk,  on  whose  origin  and  associations  light  is 
thrown  by  the  recent  excavations  in  Sinai  and  in  Syria. 

Sopt  was  first  named  in  the  Egyptian  records  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  and  is 
again  mentioned  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  The  foothold  which  he  gained  in 
Egypt  seems  to  have  come  as  the  result  of  the  help  which  his  votaries  gave  to  the 
Egyptians,  by  throwing  back  the  Mentu,  who  were  Asiatics,  for  a  nome  text 
of  Edfu  contains  the  words :  "  Shur  is  here  Sopt,  the  conqueror  of  the  Mentu,  lord 
of  the  east  country,  and  in  Edfu  golden  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  powerful  god  Sopt" 
(Brugsch,  History,  1888,  p.  568).  The  title  lord  of  the  east  was  generally  applied 
to  Sopt.  Thus  a  tablet  of  Senusert  II  (XII,  4),  found  in  the  temple  of  Wady 
Oasus  in  the  desert  of  Ooceyr  on  the  borders  of  the  Red  Sea,  called  him,  "  Sopdu, 
lord  of  the  eastern  foreigners,  and  lord  of  the  east  {Neb-adbti) "  (Wilkinson, 
Manners  and  Customs,  III,  236).  He  was  represented  standing  without  headdress, 
carrying  in  each  hand  an  ankli  or  sign  of  life  (Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs, 
1878,  III,  228).  On  inscriptions  of  the  reign  of  Amenemhat  III  (XII,  6)  found  in 
Sinai,  organisers  of  mining  expeditions  described  themselves  as,  "  beloved  of  Hathor, 
mistress  of  the  turquoise  country ;  beloved  of  Sopt,  lord  of  the  east ;  beloved 
of  .Sneferu  and  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  this  land  "  (Breasted,  Records,  I,  722 j. 

The  description  of  Sopt  as  lord  of  the  east  refers  to  his  cult  in  the  eastern 
Delta.  Pa-qesem,  the  capital  of  the  later  nome  Arabia,  had  the  alternative  name 
Per- Sopt,  ix.,  "  house  of  Sopt."  Pa-qe.sem  is  the  land  of  Goshen  of  the  Bible,  and 
the  name  Per-Sopt  survives  in  the  name  of  the  present  village  Saft  el-Henneh. 

The  god  Sopt  likewise  had  a  foothold  at  Heliopolis,  as  is  suggested  by  an 
inscription  recorded  by  Wilkinson,  which  described  him  as  "  noblest  of  the  spirits 
of  Heliopolis  "(II I,  228). 

Sopt  further  had  a  foothold  at  Sarabit  in  Sinai,  where  his  cult  is  apparent 
from  inscriptions  of  the  Xllth  and  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasties. 

The  height  of  .Sarabit  in  .Sinai  was  the  site  of  one  of  the  old  rock-sanctuaries 
known  to  us,  the  exi.stence  of  which  was  carried  back  to  the  beginnings  of  Egyptian 
dynastic  hi.story  by  the  finds  that  were  made  there  in  the  winter  of  1905-6.  It 
was  probably  much  older.  The  .sanctuary  consisted  originally  of  a  cave,  or  rather 
of  two  caves  adjacent  to  one  another,  with  separate  entrances,  which  lie  in  a  knoll 
facing  a  plateau  in  the  midst  of  wild  rocky  scenery.  The  plateau  lies  some  2,680 
feet  above  sea  level,  and  is  difficult  of  access  on  all  sides,  more  especially  on  the 
north,  where  the  cliffs  of  the  gorges  that  lead  down  to  the  Wady  Suweig  have 
sheer  falls  of  several  hundred  feet  in  places.  The  plateau  has  a  wide  outlook  and 
is  proportionately  visible  from  afar.  On  its  southern  and  western  side  it  falls  away 
abruptly,  exposing  the  stratum  which  anciently  yielded  turquoise.  The  wish  to 
control  access  to  this  turquoise  doubtless  led  to  the  permanent  occupation  of  the 

G  4 


I04  \  The  God  Sopt. 

cave ;  and  we  shall  probably  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  imagine  this  at  a  remote  period 
in  the  possession  of  a  clan,  or  hereditary  priesthood,  who,  in  return  for  offerings 
brought  to  the  shrine,  gave  turquoise,  or  the  permission  to  work  it,  inside  the 
appropriated  area.  Turquoise  was  prized  from  the  earliest  times,  as  was  shown  by 
the  beads  of  turquoise  that  have  come  out  of  the  predynastic  graves  of  Egypt 
which  date  from  the  Neolithic  Age. 

The  sanctuary  of  Sarabit  was  associated  with  a  female  divinity  to  whom  the 
Egyptians  gave  the  name  Hathor  of  Mafkat,  i.e.,  of  turquoise.  In  the  inscriptions 
in  the  early  Semitic  script  that  were  found  in  the  sanctuary,  she  appears  as  Ba'alat. 
The  period  which  witnessed  the  acceptance  by  the  Egyptians  of  Hathor  as  patron 
saint  of  Sarabit,  witnessed  the  establishment  there  also  of  Sopt,  the  cult  of  each 
divinity  being  associated  with  a  cave.  The  larger  cave,  which  always  served  as  a 
storehouse  for  offerings,  was  associated  with  Hathor.  Its  walls  were  covered  with 
figures  and  inscriptions,  and  an  altar,  fashioned  on  the  Egyptian  pattern,  was 
placed  inside  it.  The  lesser  cave,  that  measured  6  feet  by  4  feet,  with  three  steps 
leading  up  to  a  round-headed  recess,  was  associated  with  Sopt.  This  cave  was 
without  trace  of  inscription  or  tablet. 

A  later  age  associated  Sopt  more  especially  with  King  Amenemhat  III 
(XII,  6),  who  sent  many  mining  expeditions  into  Sinai.  The  open  hall  which  was 
erected  inside  the  temenos  of  the  temple,  near  its  north  entrance,  by  Queen  Hat- 
shepsut  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  showed  a  number  of  figures  on  the  walls,  and 
among  them  Sopt  who  was  represented  following  King  Amenemhat.  Sopt  at  the 
time  was  accounted  the  equal  of  Hathor.  At  the  entrance  to  a  turquoise  mine 
that  was  opened  conjointly  by  Hatshepsut  and  her  nephew  Tahutmes,  is  Tahutmes 
offering  incense  to  Hathor,  while  Hatshepsut  is  seen  offering  incense  to  Sopt. 
The  connection  of  Sopt  with  Sarabit,  the  centre  of  the  turquoise  region,  explains 
the  words  that  were  put  into  the  lips  of  the  god  at  the  Osiris  festival  at  Denderah, 
where  Sopt  addressed  the  following  words  to  Osiris  :  "  I  bring  thee  turquoise  from 
the  city  Hatqa.  Serene  be  thy  face  as  thou  lookest  at  it.  It  is  a  stone  on  thy 
hand,  an  amulet  for  thy  body"  (Brugsch,  Religion  tind  Mythologie,  1888,  p.  567). 
The  amulet  of  Sopt  at  the  city  of  Per-Sopt  in  Goshen  was  of  turquoise  also. 

The  name  Sopt  is  to  all  appearance  of  Semitic  origin.  It  is  the  verbal  parallel 
of  the  Hebrew  shophet  and  the  Phoenician  sufet,  a  word  signifying  "judge."  In 
the  Bible  the  word  shophet  was  frequently  applied  to  the  Divinity.  "Shall  not 
the  judge  {shophet)  of  all  the  world  do  right?"  (Gen.  xviii,  25).  "And  the 
heavens  shall  declare  His  righteousness,  for  Elohim  is  Shophet  himself,  Saleh " 
(Psalm  1,  7). 

Several  place-names  in  Palestine  preserve  the  name  Shophet.  There  was 
Sepheth,  modern  Safed,  situated  north  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  which  ranked  as  a 
holy  city  with  Jerusalem,  Hebron,  and  Tiberias.  Safed  occupies  a  conspicuous 
position  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  and  was  named  Tziphath  in  the  Egyptian 
Travels  of  a  Mo  har  Qil^th.  dynasty).  It  is  Tsapheth  in  the  Talmud,  and  Sephet 
in  the  Vulgate  of  Tobit  (circa  600  B.C.).  Eusebius-Jerome  mentioned  Safed  in  the 
Onomastikon  and  described  it  as  "  locus  Chananaeorum  "  and  as  "  locus  judicans" 
(ed.  Lagarde,  p.  43,  180 ;  Murray,  Palestine  and  Syria,  p.  259). 

Tell  es-Safi,  situated  between  Jerusalem  and  Gaza,  was  probably  Gath,  one 
of  the  five  royal  cities  of  the  Philistines,  where  the  Ark  was  placed  at  one  time 
It  was  looked  upon  as  a  High  Place  of  burning,  and  was  recently  excavated  (Bliss 
and  Macalister,  Excavations  in  Palestine,   1902,  pp.  30  ff.).     At  a  depth  of  1 1  to 
21  feet  the  pre-Israelite  level  was  reached,  on  which  stood  .several  rough  uprights 


I05 


THE  HIGH    PLACE  TELL  ES  SAri  .  RE-5T0B.ATI0N    AND     PLAN. 
BLISS   AND  MACALISTER,  EXCAVATIONS   IN    PALESTINE. 


CAVE    OF 
H  ATHOR.. 


CAVE    OF 

SO  pr»  u. 


SMMMES  AT  SERAJMT.   PETRIE,  RESEARCHES  iN  SINAl. 


io6  The  God  Sopt. 

or  mazzeba,  which  were  enclosed  in  one  of  several  chambers  that  were  built  at  a 
slightly  higher  level.  The  long  wall  of  the  chamber  that  enclosed  the  mazzeba 
had  a  break,  roughly  in  the  form  of  an  apse,  which  was  4  feet  5  inches  across,  and 
2  feet  4J  inches  deep.  This  apse  recalls  the  round  headed  recess  in  the  cave  of 
Sopt  at  Sarabit.  In  front  of  the  apse  of  Tell  es-Safi,  at  a  distance  of  a  few  feet 
facing  it,  was  a  rude  semicircle  of  stone  that  stood  20  inches  high. 

In  the  Hebrew  religion  the  sanctuary  was  very  generally  a  seat  of  justice,  the 
themis,  of  which  the  priests  were  the  administrators,  and  who,  in  this  capacity, 
were  sacred  and  were  called  Eloliim  (Hastings'  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  article 
"Sanctuary").  The  supposition,  therefore,  is  that  Tell  es-Safi  and  Safed  in 
Palestine,  and  likewise  Per-Sopt  in  the  land  of  Goshen,  and  the  shrine  at  Sarabit 
in  Sinai,  were  centres  to  which  matters  of  judgment  were  brought  for  decision,  or 
where  the  priest,  acting  as  the  mouthpiece  of  Divinity,  gave  out  the  pronounce- 
ments. The  round  apse  at  Tell  es-Safi,  and  the  recess  at  Sarabit  which  was  raised 
three  steps,  were,  perhaps,  the  places  occupied  by  the  priest ;  the  low  semicircle  at 
Tell  es-Safi  facing  the  apse  may  have  been  intended  for  him  who  sought  the 
judgment. 

The  connection  which  is  thus  established  between  the  shrines  of  Palestine  and 
Sinai  explains  the  existence  at  Sarabit  of  various  features  which  are  in  keeping 
with  Semitic  usage. 

Prof.  Robertson  Smith,  in  his  lectures  on  early  Semitic  religion,  showed 
how  the  barren  and  unfrequented  hill-top  would  be  the  natural  place  chosen  for 
the  holocaust,  and  in  this  connection  cited  the  proposed  sacrifice  of  Isaac  on  a 
mountain.  The  High  Place  of  Burning  was  the  accepted  site  of  religious  cult  in 
Palestine.  Tell  es-Safi  was  such  a  place  of  burning,  and  in  the  history  of  Samuel 
we  read  how  he  was  called  upon  to  sanctify  the  sacrifice  on  the  height,  of  which 
the  people  would  not  partake  until  it  had  received  his  blessing  (l  Sam.  ix,  12). 
Again,  Solomon  visited  Gibeon  where  he  burnt  sacrificial  flesh,  and  offered  a 
thousand  burnt  offerings  on  the  high  altar  (i  Kings  iii,  3).  After  the  building  of 
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  efforts  were  made  to  draw  to  it  all  the  offerings,  but  the 
High  Place  continued,  and  it  was  only  after  Captivity  (B.C.  770)  that  it  came  under 
the  ban  of  the  ceremonial  law. 

The  use  made  of  the  plateau  of  Sarabit  in  Sinai  as  a  High  Place  of  Burning 
was  known  by  the  excavations.  The  Egyptians,  when  they  gained  a  foothold  in 
the  place  in  the  Xllth  dynasty,  erected  buildings  on  the  approach  to  the  caves. 
Beneath  the  stone  floors  of  these  buildings  there  was  found  an  extensive  bed  of 
wood  ashes,  which  extended  all  across  the  temple  breadth  and  out  as  far  as  the 
stone  walls  on  the  south,  in  all  50  feet  in  breadth.  Outside  the  stone  floor  the 
ashes  would  be  carried  away  by  wind  or  rain,  beneath  it  they  had  remained.  In 
the  words  of  Prof.  Flinders  Petrie  :  "  We  must  therefore  suppose  a  bed  of  ashes  at 
least  100  feet  by  50  feet,  very  probably  much  wider,  and  varying  from  3  to  18  inches 
thick,  in  spite  of  all  denudation  that  took  place  before  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 
There  must  be  now  on  the  ground  about  50  tons  of  ashes,  and  these  are  probably 
the  residue  of  some  hundreds  of  tons  of  ashes."  Researches  in  Sinai,  1906,  p.  99). 
The  ancient  area  of  burning  being  built  over,  the  holocaust  apparently  took  place 
outside  the  temenos  on  the  north  side,  in  a  great  square  recess  against  the  hillside 
overlooking  the  Wady  Dhaba,  which  may  owe  its  origin  to  the  quarrying  of  stone 
for  the  temple  buildings.  The  great  square  was  covered  with  a  patch  of  growing 
corn  in  the  winter  of  1905-6,  which  pointed  to  the  presence  and  comparative 
fertility  of  the  soil. 


The  God  Sopl. 


107 


Another  feature  peculiar  to  Semitic  usage  was  the  frequent  erection  of  rough 
stones  or  mnszeba  which  are  found  in  the  uplands  of  Palestine,  and  of  which  we 
read  in  the  Bible.  The  sanctuary  at  Tell  es-Safi  contained  such  uprights,  the 
devotional  and  commemorative  character  of  which  is  well  known. 

Thus,  in  the  story  of  Jacob  we  read  how,  coming  from  Beersheba,  he  lighted 
on  a  certain  place  that  was  holy  ground,  and  tarried  all  night  because  the  sun  was 
set,  and  took  stones  to  serve  him  for  pillows.  He  had  his  wonderful  dream,  and, 
on  the  following  morning,  he  set  up  the  stone  on  which  he  had  slept,  and  poured 
oil  on  it  and  called  it  Bethel,  saying  :  "  In  the  stone  that  I  have  set  up  for  a  pillar 


AMENHETEP    III   OFFERING   TO  SoP  r. 
Serabit.  XVIIIth  dynasty. 

iinazzeba)  shall  be  God's  house"  (Gen.  xxviii,  22).  On  a  later  occasion  Jacob 
made  a  covenant  with  Laban,  in  ratification  of  which  he  set  up  a  stone  {tnazzebd), 
and  called  his  brethren  to  take  stones  and  make  a  heap  (perhaps  an  enclosure), 
and,  "  they  ate  and  they  drank  there  "  (Gen.  xxxi,  45).  Again,  when  the  Israelites 
were  encamped  before  the  holy  mount,  Moses  .set  up  twelve  mazzeba,  and  Joshua 
did  the  same  after  the  Israelites  crossed  the  Jordan,  placing  twelve  stones  within 
circles  at  Gilgal,  which  remained  the  place  of  assembly  and  worship  while  Joshua 
was  engaged  in  warfare. 


io8  The  God  Sopt.  ' 

On  the  plateau  of  Sarabit  in  Sinai,  scattered  here  and  there  within  sight  of 
the  ancient  place  of  burning,  were  a  number  of  rough  enclosures  made  by  clearing 
the  ground  of  stones  and  piling  them  together.  The  enclosures  were  for  the  most 
part  4  to  6  feet  inside  size,  and  many  contained  a  stone  of  larger  size  that  was  set 
up  on  end  on  one  side  of  the  enclosure  and  propped  up  with  other  stones.  There 
were  also  some  uprights  without  enclosures.  The  walls  that  marked  the  extent  of 
the  temenos  were  made  in  the  same  way,  and  there  was  a  similar  wall  across  the 
Wady  Umm  Agraf,  the  valley  that  extended  south  of  the  sanctuary,  as  though 
partitioning  this  off  as  a  reserved  tract  of  land,  or  hima,  as  this  is  known  to  us  in 
the  ancient  sanctuaries  of  Taif  in  Arabia  and  elsewhere. 

Another  Semitic  feature  was  the  use  of  tanks  of  water  for  ablution,  such  as 
the  apsu  of  ancient  Babylonia,  and  the  laver  that  stood  between  the  entrance  of 
the  tabernacle  and  the  altar  (Exod.  xxx,  i8).  In  the  Temple  of  Solomon  stood 
a  "  molten  sea  that  was  round  about,"  and  there  were,  moreover,  on  the  right  of  the 
house  eastwards  ten  lavers  of  brass,  five  on  the  right  side  and  five  on  the  left  that 
moved  on  wheels  (i  Kings  vii,  23  and  38).  The  Arab  mosque  of  to-day  has  a 
ghusl,  or  place  for  legal  washing  outside,  and  a  ivascm,  or  circular  tank,  inside  for 
ablutions. 

At  Sarabit  in  Sinai,  a  rectangular  stone  tank  stood  outside  the  north  entrance 
to  the  temple  area.  Inside  this,  in  the  centre  of  a  pillared  court  that  was  built  in 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  stood  a  circular  tank  31  inches  across,  with  a  rectangular 
tank  built  into  the  wall  of  the  same  court,  which  was  probably  older  than  the 
building.  Another  rectangular  tank  stood  in  the  approach  to  the  lesser  cave. 
The  disposition  of  these  tanks  was  such  that  the  worshipper  who  approached  the 
Temple  on  the  north  side  passed  the  tank  at  the  entrance,  and  the  various  tanks 
inside  on  his  progress  to  the  lesser  cave. 

Lin  A    ECKENSTEIN. 


[The  restoration  and  plan  of  the  shrine  at  Tell  es-Safi  are  irreconcilable  in  the 
work  quoted. — Ed.] 


(     109     ) 


THE   GEOGRAPHY   OF   THE   GODS. 

So  far  but  little  account  has  been  taken  df  the  manner  in  which  the  worship 
of  the  gods  was  distributed  in  Egypt.  Certain  gods  are  well  known  to  belong  to 
some  town  or  district,  as  Ptah  of  Memphis,  or  Khnemu  of  the  Cataracts.  Yet 
often  this  popular  attribution  may  be  misleading  if  we  arc  studying  early  times, 
as  a  position  of  a  worship  may  be  quite  secondary,  such  as  Osiris  at  Abydos,  or 
Ptah  at  Thebes.  It  seems  likely,  however,  that  the  gods  of  a  particular  tribe 
would  have  special  worship  in  the  regions  where  that  tribe  first  settled  before  they 
mixed  with  other  inhabitants  and  honoured  their  gods.  Hence  a  study  of  the 
distribution  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  promises  to  throw  light  on  two  large 
problems  of  the  primitive  ages  :  (i)  What  regions  were  occupied  by  the  worshippers 
of  certain  gods  ?  (2)  What  gods  were  worshipped  by  the  same  people  ? 

If  there  is  any  hesitation  whether  such  a  method  can  lead  to  distinct  results, 
compare  at  a  glance  the  distribution  in  Maps  i  and  2  with  that  in  Maps  5  and  6. 
In  I  and  2  the  worship  is  limited  to  the  Delta  and  the  Thebaid  ;  in  5  there  is  little 
in  the  Delta  and  Thebaid,  and  the  majority  lie  between  the  two  extremes.  In 
6  there  is  more  in  the  Thebaid,  but  the  middle  region  is  well  supplied,  and  only 
one  temple  is  in  the  Delta.  These  directly  opposite  conditions  show  that  there 
are  clear  materials  for  historical  study.  Firstly,  we  will  consider  the  facts  of  the 
distribution  ;  and,  secondly,  the  relation  of  these  to  the  general  history. 

In  order  to  avoid  the  encumbrance  of  a  great  number  of  maps,  sixteen  of  the 
principal  gods  are  grouped  together  here  in  six  maps.  Such  gods  as  are  similarly 
distributed  in  their  worship  are  here  placed  together,  marking  their  several  cities 
with  lettering,  sloping  backward  or  forward,  or  else  upright,  to  distinguish  the 
different  gods.  It  is  easy  then  to  grasp  at  one  view  all  the  lettering  of  one 
direction.  A  considerable  difficulty  in  such  an  enquiry  is  the  uncertainty  of  the 
places  indicated.  On  a  temple  scene,  or  an  altar,  is  found  a  mention  of  a  god  of 
some  place ;  but  there  may  be  only  vague  indications  otherwise  as  to  where  that 
place  lay.  The  names  of  the  centres  of  worship  have  been  taken  from  Lanzone's 
Dizionario  di  Mitologia  Egizia,  with  a  few  additions.  Their  identification  has 
been  done  from  Brugsch's  Geographical  Dictionary  where  possible ;  and  often  a 
general  indication  of  a  place  being  in  a  given  Nome  has  been  used,  as  a  more  precise 
locality  is  not  needed  in  this  enquiry.  A  considerable  number  of  names  have  been 
omitted,  as  there  was  no  clue  to  their  position. 

The  first  great  grouping  to  consider  is  that  in  Maps  i  and  2,  showing  the 
position  of  the  worship  of  Ra,  Behudet,  Mut,  Set,  and  Nebhat.  First,  we  may 
note  that  this  corroborates  the  myth  that  Nebhat  was  the  wife  of  Set.  The  distri- 
bution of  her  worship  follows  that  of  Set,  and  is  entirely  different  to  that  of  the 
Osiris  triad.  In  Map  i  there  are  places  of  Behudet  and  of  Mut  on  the  desert 
roads  to  the  Red  Sea,  shown  here  by  arrows.  What  can  be  the  cause  in  Maps  i 
and  2  of  this  distribution  at  both  ends  of  the  land,  and  not  in  the  middle?  It 
.seems  likely  to  have  been  due  to  entering  Egypt  from  the  Red  Sea,  partly  across 


no  The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 

the  desert  routes  to  the  upper  country,  partly  by  Suez.  Confirming  this  are  the 
worships  in  the  eastern  desert  and  the  distribution  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Delta, 
twelve  on  the  east,  four  in  the  centre,  and  none  on  the  west  of  the  Delta.  On  the 
contrary,  see  Map  4,  where  the  region  of  Amen-Ra  is  the  west  and  central  Delta, 
and  not  the  east.     We  will  next  consider  these  gods  more  in  detail. 

As  to  Ra,  there  is  only  one  southern  city,  and  that  is  Thes,  the  city  of  Behudet, 
Edfu,  where  another  form  of  the  Sun-god  was  prominent,  and  therefore  as  Ra  is 
only  mentioned  in  a  very  late  te.xt  (Dendcreh),  he  is  probably  only  secondary.  The 
Ra  influence  was  by  far  the  greatest  at  Heliopolis,  and  next  to  that  at  Xois.  It 
appears  to  have  come  in  from  the  north-east. 

Behudet,  or  Hudet,  is  a  god  that,  from  his  incessant  repetition  on  buildings, 
ought  to  have  received  more  attention.  He  is  clearly  a  sun-god,  and  the  hawk 
connection  is  probably  subordinate,  due  to  the  wings  symbolic  of  the  flight  of  the 
sun.  Whether  the  wings  are  those  of  the  hawk  for  flight,  or  of  the  vulture  for  pro- 
tection, is  not  always  clear.  For  the  distinction  of  hawk  and  vulture  wings  in  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  see  Naville,  Deir  el-Bahari,  Pis.  LXVI,  LXXXII,  and  compare 
the  hudet  in  Pi.  LVI,  where  it  seems  more  of  the  hawk  form.  Granting  that  these 
are  hawk  wings,  yet  no  hawk  head  appears ;  the  sun  has  borrowed  wings  as  an 
emblem  of  its  movement  across  the  sky,  but  it  is  not  a  hawk-god.  Maspero 
discusses  {Etudes  Myth.,  II,  313)  whether  the  reading  is  behudet  or  hudet,  and  he  is 
by  no  means  convinced  of  the  "  b  "  reading,  and  prefers  hudet.  Neither  he  nor  other 
writers  have  adduced  what  seems  a  clear  connection  of  the  latter  form.  This  is 
the  Hebrew,  Tin,  huhd,  "  splendour,  glory,  majesty,  or  honour."  Such  would  be 
a  likely  appellation  for  the  glory  or  majesty  of  the  winged  sun,  and  for  its  figure 
placed  over  the  doorways.  This  Hudet  is  the  god  who  is  accompanied  by  the 
metal-workers,  tnesnitu,  whose  forge,  vuseti,  was  in  the  temple  of  Edfu,  and  at  Zaru 
in  the  north.  Other  forges  are  stated  to  have  been  at  Herakleopolis,  but  no  Hudet 
of  that  city  is  mentioned  (see  Maspero,  Etudes,  II,  313-317).  These  mesnitu  were 
the  army  of  Horus  against  Set.  The  god  Hudet,  or  Behudet,  appears,  therefore, 
to  have  come  into  Egypt  by  the  Berenice-Koptos  road,  on  which  Compasi  retained 
the  name  of  Qembaus  where  he  was  worshipped.  He  became  established  as  the 
great  god  of  Apollinopolis  or  Edfu.  He  also  entered  by  the  north  and  was 
established  in  the  frontier  town  of  Zaru  and  the  neighbouring  city  of  Tanis.  The 
mixture  of  the  splendour  of  the  flying  sun  with  the  animal  hawk-worship  of  the 
aborigines,  and  with  the  Horus-worship  of  the  other  tribes,  is  a  later  confusion. 

Mut,  the  mother-goddess,  would  not  be  expected  to  appear  in  this  connection, 
as  she  is  so  regularly  associated  with  Amen  in  later  times.  Yet  the  distribution 
of  the  cities  of  Mut  is  distinctly  of  the  eastern  type,  while  that  of  Amen,  Map  4, 
is  western.  Her  entry  by  the  south  is  indicated  by  the  worship  of  Mut  along  the 
Hamamat  road,  and  her  greatest  temple  of  all  was  at  Karnak,  from  which  she  is 
usually  called  Mut  lady  of  Asher.  Then  there  is  no  evidence  northwards  of 
her  worship  until  the  eastern  road  into  the  Delta,  where  she  was  worshipped  at 
Herpopolis ;  apparently  at  Mendes,  if  ab  (horns)  neteru  is  equivalent  to  ap 
(horns)  neterui;  and  certainly  at  Samhud  in  the  central  Delta,  where  she  had 
a  temple.  Thus  she  clearly  comes  in  from  the  Red  Sea  side  and  not  from  the 
west.  The  name  of  Samhud  is  also  a  link  with  the  worship  of  Hudet,  as  it  is 
"  united  to  Hudet." 

Set  has  the  character  of  an  early  god,  preceding  the  entry  of  Horus  Behudet, 
who  warred  against  him.  He  was  certainly  brought  into  Upper  Egypt  by  the 
Desert  road,  as  he  had  there  two  centres  of  the  first  class — Nubt,  opposite  the  Desert 


The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 


I II 


road,  and  Ombos  ;  he  also  was  worshipped  at  Thebes.  He  was  brought  in  by  the 
Red  Sea  way  to  the  eastern  Delta,  where  he  appears  as  the  god  of  the  Pharbaethite 
Nome,  as  worshipped  at  Utuu  in  that  Nome,  and  at  Sapmeru,  which  may  be  Mert 
in  the  same  Nome.  North  of  this  he  appears  as  of  Hermopolis  ;  and  that  this  is 
the  Delta  Hermopolis  is  shown  by  another  place  of  his  worship,  Per-nehem,  the 


C  i-T  I  es    OF 

BEHODE  T 
MUT 


Centres  of  Worship  of  the  Gods  in  Egypt. 


112  TIte  Geography  of  the  Gods.  * 

goddess  Nehemaui  being  of  the  Delta  Nome.  His  great  centre  was  that  estabh'shed 
later  by  the  Hyksos  at  Hauar,  or  Auaris,  which  appears  to  be  the  camp  at 
Tell  cl-Yahudiyeh.  Thus,  though  early,  Set  is  by  no  means  aboriginal,  but  has 
been  brought  in  at  the  opposite  ends  of  the  land,  and  was  not  recognised  between. 

Nebhat  has  closely  the  same  distribution  of  worship  as  Set.  Her  centres  were 
near  Nubt,  and  between  Thebes  and  Ombos.  In  the  Delta  her  worship  was  at 
Per-mert,  in  the  Pharbaethite  Nome,  and  Onuphis  probably  north  of  that ;  also  in 
the  middle  Delta  at  Iseum  and  Hat-shen  in  the  Sixth  Nome.  Thus,  her  position 
is  unlike  that  of  the  Osiris- Isis  family,  who  appear  in  the  western  Delta  and  all 
along  the  Nile  course.  This  certainly  points  to  her  having  a  similar  source  to  that 
of  Set,  and  not  being  originally  in  the  Osiride  family. 

In  Map  3  the  Osiride  triad  are  placed  together,  as  there  is  little  difference  in 
the  distribution  of  their  worship.  Osiris  was  eventually  worshipped  in  every  Nome, 
but  it  would  have  been  useless  to  mark  the  whole  country,  so  the  names  here  are 
of  those  cities  which  held  the  greater  relics  of  Osiris,  presumably  those  places 
which  principally  worshipped  him  in  early  times.  The  distribution  is  very  general, 
covering  all  parts  of  the  Delta  and  a  fair  amount  of  the  middle  country.  In 
Nubia,  Horus  alone  seems  to  have  been  worshipped,  perhaps  identified  with  an 
aboriginal  god.  The  general  view  of  the  Osiride  triad  is  that  of  a  settlement  so 
early  in  the  land  that  the  worship  was  generally  diffused. 

Amen,  and  his  later  form  Amen-Ra,  are  somewhat  different  in  their  distribu- 
tion, Map  4.  They  were  entirely  ignored  in  the  eastern  Delta,  but  in  the  central 
and  western  Delta  had  a  firm  hold.  It  does  not  seem  as  if  their  worship  was  due 
to  the  influence  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  for  in  that  age  the  eastern  Delta  was  the 
most  developed.  The  earlier  form,  Amen  only,  is  limited  to  the  Thebaid  proper, 
between  Dendereh  and  Philae.  The  presence  of  Amen  Ra  as  the  great  god  of  the 
Oasis,  and  the  late  importance  of  Zeus  Ammon  in  Cyrcnaica,  point  to  Amen 
having  been  brought  into  Egypt  from  the  west. 

Khensu  has  a  more  Egyptian  connection,  belonging  to  the  Thebaid  down  to 
Hermopolis,  but  never  below  that.  This  would  point  to  his  having  come  from  the 
Red  Sea,  or  else  being  a  really  indigenous  god  of  the  South,  apart  from  the 
eastern  and  western  influences,  which  took  full  effect  in  the  Delta, 

We  now  turn  to  some  gods  the  worship  of  which  seems  to  have  been  very 
early,  and  without  retaining  any  traces  of  its  source  or  introduction.  In  Map  5 
are  the  cities  of  Tehuti  and  Anup,  which  are  similar  in  their  distribution,  scattered 
equally  all  down  the  country,  and  without  any  prominence  in  the  Delta.  It  is, 
however,  only  Tehuti  whose  worship  entered  Nubia.  The  position  of  Heseret  is 
here  placed  at  El-Asirat,  as  it  is  known  to  be  in  this  region.  But  it  has  been 
compared  with  Hisoris,  which  is  placed  north  of  Ptolemais  in  the  Antonine 
Itinerary,  that  is  perhaps  twenty  miles  north  of  Asirat.  It  is  perhaps  doubtful 
whether  Lykopolis  should  be  credited  to  Anup  at  all,  as  the  whole  jackal-worship 
there  may  be  due  to  Upuat.  There  is,  however,  the  distinct  mention  of  "  Anup 
lord  of  Sayut."  The  position  of  Anup  altogether  .seems  to  be  that  of  an  indigenous 
god  of  the  dead  as  a  part  of  the  aboriginal  animal-worship,  and  it  is  only  by  quite 
artificial  myths  that  he  is  brought  into  connection  with  later  forms  of  the  religion. 

Other  gods  of  an  early  type  are  noted  in  Map  6.  Khnem,  the  creator-god, 
was  worshipped  along  the  whole  country  from  Nubia  down  to  the  Sethroite  Nome. 
His  worship  long  preceded  that  of  Ptah  as  creator,  which  was  restricted  to  four 
Delta  citie.s — Memphis,  Bubastis,  Letopolis,  and  Mendes.  Beside  these  Ptah  only 
appears  as  an  artificial   intrusion  at  Thebes  and  in  Nubia,  perhaps  due  to  tho 


The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 


113 


importance  of  the  army  corps  of  Ptah.  Thus  Ptah  appears  to  have  come  late 
into  Egypt  and  from  the  eastern  side,  while  Khnem  is  the  aboriginal  god,  probably 
formed  from  the  primitive  animal-worship  of  the  parent  ram. 


1m   Nubia 
A60CC-CS     BeAoi. 


Cektres^of  Worship  of  the^Gods  in  Egypt. 


H 


114  The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 

Shu  and  his  consort  Tefnut  have  much  the  same  range.  They  belong 
mainly  to  the  South,  and  only  Tefnut  once  appears  in  the  Delta,  where  she  is 
placed  at  Rehu  in  the  Hermopolite  Nome  (de  Roug^,  Geografhie,  107).  They 
seem  to  belong  to  a  very  primitive  stage  of  the  native  cosmogony  next  after  the 
animal-gods.  Their  human  nature  was  not  constant,  as  they  were  often  figured  as 
lions.  Shu  was  evidently  space  which  separates  heaven  from  earth,  and  Tefnut 
seems  to  have  been  the  moisture  of  space ;  these  preceded  the  earth  and  sky  which 
they  formed. 

We  will  now  notice  other  gods  which  are  so  seldom  localised  that  it  is  useless 
to  map  them. 

Sekhmet  appears  at  Bigeh  by  the  Cataract,  at  Karnak,  at  Memphis,  and 
Letopolis,  and  once  in  the  Delta  at  Mansura  {sort).  She  is  said  to  be  the  chief 
over  the  Tahennu,  pointing  to  a  Libyan  origin.  It  is  dififtcult  to  see  any  link 
between  her  and  Ptah,  with  whom  she  is  associated  at  Memphis. 

Min  only  appears  close  to  the  Hamamat  region  whence  he  entered  Egypt. 
Koptos  was  his  primitive  Nome,  and  from  thence  he  passed  seventy  miles  up  and 
down  stream  to  Edfu  and  Panopolis ;  he  also  occurs  at  Dendereh,  close  to  Koptos. 
Once  he  appears  connected  with  Saqqara,  and  once  with  Nubia,  but  practically  he 
is  centred  on  the  Desert  road  by  which  he  was  brought  in,  his  mother  being 
named  Khenti-abti,  "  the  leader  of  the  East." 

Hathor  was  very  widely  worshipped,  with  equal  distribution  from  the  Cataract 
down  to  the  sea  ;  also  in  Sinai  and  Byblos.  The  regular  diffusion  implies  either  a 
very  early  basis,  or  else  state  worship  which  spread  irrespective  of  ancestral 
habit.  The  latter  seems  to  have  been  the  case  here,  as  Narmer  has  heads  of 
Hathor  on  his  waist  cloth,  and  Pepy  repeats  the  Hathor  head  along  a  dado  on  his 
work.  The  regularity  with  which  Hathor  is  associated  with  other  gods  in  most  of 
the  Nomes,  and  is  used  as  a  secondary  name  of  Isis,  all  points  to  a  general  worship 
by  the  dynastic  people.  Sebek  was  mainly  worshipped  in  the  Fayum,  at  Ombos 
and  at  Silsileh.  There  are  also  references  to  the  crocodile-worship  at  tep  ant  (a 
cave  near  Memphis),  at  Bekhat  (Sinai),  at  Thebes,  at  Athribis,  and  in  the  Metelite 
Nome.  The  worship  was  part  of  the  primitive  animal -cult,  but  seems  to  have 
generally  been  at  places  where  crocodiles  were  prominent.  There  does  not  seem 
to  be  a  centre  of  worship  corresponding  with  the  great  crocodile  mummy  pit  at 
Ma'abdeh. 

Mentu  was  the  local  god  of  Hcrmonthis  ;  from  there  his  worship  spread  south 
to  Edfu  and  Elephantine,  and  north  to  Medamot  and  Dendereh,  with — strange  to 
say — an  extension  to  the  Wady  Natrun.  Though  often  mentioned  in  figures  of 
speech  in  the  New  Kingdom,  yet  the  worship  was  practically  limited  to  the  strict 
Thcbaid. 

Anher  belonged  originally  to  Thinis,  but  also  was  connected  with  the  central 
Delta,  at  Sebennytos,  and  the  XVI Ith  Nome,  north  of  that;  also  in  Upper  Nubia. 
These  centres  seem  to  be  only  due  to  political  movement. 

Neit,  on  the  contrary,  belongs  essentially  to  the  Delta,  especially  Sais.  She 
also  is  named  with  Athribis,  Sebennytos,  and  Pa-nezer  in  the  eastern  Delta. 
Probably  by  political  influence  she  appears  at  Esneh.  While  much  noticed  in 
names  and  priesthoods  from  the  1st  to  the  Vth  dynasties,  after  that  she  almost 
disappears  until  the  great  revival  by  the  XXV Ith  dynasty  at  Sais. 

Geb,  though  so  fundamental  a  deity,  was  not  localised  beyond  Memphis  and 
the  cultivation  of  Heliopolis,  except  in  the  very  late  temple  of  Ombos. 


The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 


IIS 


Similarly  Atmu  was  closely  localised  to  Heliopolis  and  Pithom.  Sati  was 
only  recognised  at  the  Cataracts — Syene,  Elephantine,  and  Bigeh.  Thanen  was 
only  worshipped  at  Hermonthis,  and  Dudu  at  Esneh.  All  of  these  then  were 
entirely  local  gc^s,  like  special  forms  of  Horus,  and  were  not  national  except  so 
far  as  they  had  been  provided  with  a  resting  place  in  the  general  mythology. 


\^t'M^o^*ov.\s  • 


HU 
LtKopaLfS, 


'AtSI.1Lt-\H^ 

^?.^Dos . 

\^ 

C  iTiEs  or, 

T^VVVi-^  \ 

>Vt5t? 

W\T- 

/\N  U  P 

Cities    in 

Nu&iA 

■^K\-V^\S,PstV.CH\S 

?Nt^V>feS. 

\_Wopov_\s  - 


SlA/EAiTi  U\Jb\K    NUBIA 

Centres  of  Worship  op  the  Gods  in  Egypt. 


H   2 


Il6  The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 

Of  course  in  every  age  the  god  of  the  capital  of  the  dynasty  had  the  more 
general  acceptance  in  the  rest  of  the  country,  but  seldom  was  called  after  other 
places,  or  had  temples  erected  as  new  foundations. 

From  these  positions  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  we  gain  a  fresh  light  on  their 
relations  and  origins.  Let  us  look  first  at  those  which,  by  their  wide  distribution, 
appear  to  be  the  earliest. 

The  gods  which  belong  to  the  whole  country,  are  Tehuti,  Anup,  Khnem,  and 
Sebek.  All  of  these  are  entirely  animal-gods — the  ibis,  the  jackal,  the  ram,  and 
the  crocodile,  or  else  are,  at  least,  represented  with  animal  heads.  They  belong, 
therefore,  by  their  nature  to  the  earliest  class  of  the  gods  before  the  Osiris  triad. 
Now  it  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  the  Ra  myth  has  features  even  older 
than  the  second  prehistoric  civilisation  (ANCIENT  Egypt,  1914,  21) ;  and  that  the 
Osiris  worship  cannot  therefore  be  put  later  than  the  first  civilisation,  thus  according 
with  the  tradition  that  Osiris  led  the  Egyptians  from  savagery.  Accordingly,  the 
earliest  animal-gods  must  belong  to  the  age  before  the  settled  civilisation  and  the 
earliest  graves,  to  a  condition  like  that  of  nomad  savages,  such  as  the  Australians 
or  Tasmanians.  The  nature  of  the  animal-gods  of  such  a  people  throws  much 
light  on  their  mental  state.  The  protection  of  the  dead  by  the  jackal  shows  that 
the  corpse  was  not  disregarded,  but  was  placed  apart ;  or  perhaps  the  jackal  was 
allowed  to  eat  the  flesh,  similar  to  birds  being  allowed  to  eat  the  bodies  of  the 
Parsis  at  present.  The  moon  was  the  most  attractive  thing  in  nature  to  them,  as 
Tehuti  is  the  Moon-god,  "  he  who  is  the  moon,"  and  Zehu,  or  Zehut,  as  a  name 
for  the  moon  is  indicated  by  the  words  sehat,  "  the  white  metal,  lead."  This  may 
be  connected  with  TO,  tzakh,  "  white,  shining,  or  clear." 

It  is  very  notable  that  there  is  no  sign  of  Ra  being  a  primitive  god  ;  the 
worship  of  the  flying  sun,  hudet,  was  only  in  the  South  and  the  Delta ;  the  worship 
of  Ra  was  originally  only  in  Heliopolis.  The  Moon-god  Tehuti  was  worshipped  at 
sites  along  Upper  Egypt,  and  had  his  second  great  centre  at  Hermopolis  of  the 
Delta.  This  is  quite  in  accord  with  the  ideas  of  the  nomad  Arabs,  to  whom  the 
moon  was  a  deity  far  more  important  than  the  sun.  To  a  people  who  do  not 
depend  on  cultivation,  and  see  the  need  of  sunshine  to  ripen  crops,  who  live  in  a 
hot  climate  and  do  not  seek  the  sun  for  warmth,  to  such  the  moon,  lighting  the 
night  for  hunting  and  wandering,  is  the  more  important  light.  From  being  the 
Moon-god,  Tehuti  naturally  became  the  god  of  recording  time  by  the  revolutions 
of  the  moon,  the  primitive  man's  calendar.  The  month  takes  precedence  of  the 
year  as  a  register  in  Arabia  and  various  other  countries ;  the  solar  year  was  fitted 
on  to  the  months,  and  lengthened  or  shortened  to  fit  them  as  might  happen,  leading 
to  utter  confusion  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  calendars.  Thus  the  moon,  the  month, 
and  the  Moon-god  claim  attention  before  the  sun  and  the  year.  The  Moon-god 
becomes  the  measurer  of  time,  hence  he  is  the  recorder,  and  hence  the  god  of 
writing  and  of  all  learning. 

The  primitive  animal-worship  of  the  ram  indicates  that  the  savage  Egyptian 
already  recognised  the  essential  action  of  the  male,  and  this  suggests  that  cattle- 
keeping  may  have  been  already  practised  for  such  a  conclusion  to  have  been 
observed.  The  name  of  Khnem  was  perhaps  subsequent  to  the  adoption  of  the 
worship.  It  appears  to  start  from  khnem,  "  to  join,"  and  hence  to  construct  or 
build,  much  as  we  now  speak  of  a  carpenter  and  joiner,  and  of  construction  in  wood 
as  joinery.  From  construction  it  is  natural  for  the  word  to  be  applied  to  creation, 
as  we  speak  of  the  "  Architect  of  the  Universe."     Hence  the  creative  Ram-god  had 


Tlie  Geography  of  the  Gods.  117 

the  name  of  the  Constructor  or  Creator.  Later,  when  a  human  figure  was  adopted 
with  a  ram's  head,  the  idea  of  construction  was  passed  on  to  wheel-made  pottery, 
which  was  unknown  before  the  dynasties ;  then  Khnem  was  figured  as  modelhng 
men  upon  the  potter's  wheel. 

Sebek,  the  crocodile,  must  have  been  a  terror  to  be  propitiated  so  soon  as  the 
pluvial  period  ceased  in  Egypt.  No  water  could  be  obtained  except  from  the  Nile  ; 
and  the  Nile  then  was  not  the  clear  open  channel  that  we  know :  it  was  a  morass 
stretching  across  the  valley,  full  of  reeds  along  the  shoaly  banks,  giving  plenty  of 
cover  to  the  crocodile  and  hippopotamus.  Whenever  water  was  fetched  from  the 
river,  or  anyone  went  down  to  drink,  the  dread  of  the  crocodiles'  jaws  was  before 
them.  Sebek  was  the  one  great  evil  power  which  must  be  propitiated  before 
anything. 

Thus  the  gods  that  are  linked  with  the  life  of  the  savage  Egyptian  are :  the 
regulating  moon,  the  creative  ram,  the  jackal  for  the  dead,  and  the  crocodile  terror 
of  the  living. 

The  gods  that  belong  more  to  the  southerners  are  Shu  and  Tefnut.  These 
belong  to  a  later  stratum  than  the  preceding,  as  they  are  more  abstract — space  and 
moisture — and  they  are  frequently  of  human  form.  Yet  they  were  also  figured  as 
two  foreparts  of  lions  joined  ;  or  separately,  Tefnut  has  often  the  head  of  a  lioness 
and  Shu  is  human.  As  they  are  not  special  gods  of  any  one  place,  and  are 
connected  with  the  very  early  mythology  of  Nut  and  Geb,  they  appear  to  belong 
to  a  primitive  period. 

A  later  Moon-god  was  Khensu,  who  was  also  a  southern  god  from  Hermopolis 
to  Ombos.  His  name  refers,  not  to  the  whiteness  of  the  moon,  nor  its  time 
regulating,  but  to  the  gliding  of  the  moon  across  the  sky,  sailing  in  its  boat  on  the 
heavenly  ocean.  The  root  is  khens,  "  to  travel,"  or  "  pass  through,"  and  Khensu  is 
"  the  traveller."  The  god  is  always  represented  with  the  crescent  moon,  or  rarely, 
the  disk  alone.  A  curious  feature  is  the  compounding  of  Khensu  with  other  gods, 
Khensu-Ra  of  Thebes,  Khensu- Hor  of  Ombos,  Khensu-Shu  of  Thebes,  Khensu- 
Tehuti  of  Edfu  and  Hermopolis.  These  show  that  Khensu  does  not  belong  to  the 
people  who  worshipped  Ra,  Horus  or  Tehuti.  This  excludes  the  animal-gods,  the 
Osiris  and  the  Ra  worshippers — all  the  principal  groups.  As  a  purely  human  god 
Khensu  belongs  to  rather  a  late  stage  in  the  mixture,  and  to  a  moon-worshipping 
people  apart  from  the  Old  Egyptians.  His  position  from  Hermopolis  to  Ombos 
shows  that  he  came  in  from  the  Red  Sea  side,  or  perhaps  from  Nubia  An  Arabic 
source  seems  thus  to  be  indicated. 

The  Osiride  triad  evidently  belong  together,  by  the  similar  diffusion  of  their 
worship,  while  other  gods  who  were  associated  with  this  group  are  marked  off  by  a 
different  distribution,  thus  pointing  to  Set,  Nebhat,  and  Anup  as  being  really 
extraneous,  and  only  incorporated  in  the  family  by  tribal  alliance.  The  diffusion 
along  the  whole  country,  and  especially  that  on  the  west  of  the  Delta,  agrees  with 
the  western  source  of  the  triad.  The  chain  of  oases  from  the  coast,  the  Wady 
Natrun,  el-Bahrieh,  Earafreh,  el-Khargeh,  and  Kurkur,  all  served  as  stepping-stones 
for  western  tribes  to  pass  into  the  Nile  Valley  along  its  length.  The  connection  of 
Asar  with  the  Libyan  Ausar,  User,  "old  man,"  has  long  been  noticed ;  it  may  be 
added  that  Hor  or  Horus  may  likewise  come  from  the  Libyan  Aran,  "a  child." 

Amen  was  a  god  whose  worship  was  rather  similarly  diffused,  but  not  between 
Habennu  and  Tentyra.  This  distribution  implies  that  the  entry  of  Amen  from  his 
special  Oasis  of  Siwah  was  by  the  F"ayum  and  the  Coast  road  ;  while  the  southern 
worship  came  in  from  the  Oasis  of  Khargeh  where  Amen  was  also  worshipped.   The 

H  3 


1 1 8  The  Geography  of  the  Gods. 

Amen-worship  certainly  came  in  much  later  than  the  Osiris-worship.  It  has  been 
supposed  that  the  Amen-worship  came  from  Ethiopia,  but  we  know  that  it 
belonged  to  Thebes,  in  the  Middle  Kingdom,  while  there  is  no  trace  of  Ethiopian 
civilisation  till  the  New  Kingdom,  and  no  influence  on  Egypt  till  the  XXVth 
dynasty.  If  the  worship  were  of  southern  origin  it  would  be  very  unlikely  that 
most  of  the  centres  of  it  should  be  in  the  central  and  western  Delta.  The  much 
nearer  sources  of  the  oases  are  far  more  likely.  The  presumption  is  that  Amen 
belonged  to  some  later  occupants  of  the  Libyan  region,  who  came  in  subsequently 
to  the  Osiris  worshippers. 

In  connection  with  Libya  we  should  note  Sekhmet  being  called  chief  of  the 
Tahennu,  as  connected  with  her  worship  in  the  Delta  and  at  the  Cataract.  There 
seems  good  ground  for  what  is  known  as  the  "C"  type  of  burials  south  of  the 
Cataract  being  of  a  Libyan  tribe  (see  Bates,  Eastern  Libyans,  245-252  ;  Ancient 
Egypt,  1914,  183).  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to  see  in  Sekhmet  the  goddess  of  these 
people,  who  were  mainly  in  the  Delta  but  also  settled  between  the  First  and 
Second  Cataracts.  Her  worship  at  Karnak  would  agree  with  the  western  importa- 
tion of  Amen  there.  She  is,  however,  never  associated  with  Amen,  and  belongs  to 
a  different  and  earlier  stratum,  associated  with  Ra. 

Next  turn  to  the  entirely  different  type  of  distribution,  that  found  only  in  the 
Delta  and  the  South,  or  in  one  of  these  only.  When  it  is  in  the  Eastern  Delta 
only,  the  importation  from  Asia  is  probable.  When  only  in  the  South,  importation 
from  Nubia.  When  in  both  the  Delta  and  the  South,  omitting  most  of  the  Nile 
Valley  between  those  parts,  then  importation  from  the  Red  Sea  by  Suez  and 
Koptos  is  the  more  probable  course. 

The  only  original  centre  of  Ra-worship  is  Heliopolis,  and  the  southern  centre 
of  Edfu  is  only  due  to  a  .secondary  identification  of  Ra  with  Hudet.  It  .seems  then 
by  its  position  that  this  worship  came  across  from  Syria,  like  the  later  form  of 
Heliopolitan  sun-worship  of  the  Aten  or  Aton,  the  Syrian  Adon,  or  Lord.  The 
obelisk  was  the  special  emblem  of  sun-worship,  as  the  obelisk-temples  of  Ra  in  the 
Vth  dynasty,  and  the  obelisk  of  Heliopolis.  The  pair  of  obelisks  before  an 
Egyptian  temple  are  the  parallel  of  Jachin  and  Boaz  before  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
the  two  pillars  shown  before  the  Syrian  temples  on  coins  and  gems,  and  those 
described  by  Lucian  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  the  Syrian  goddess.  The  ascent 
of  such  a  column,  and  sojourn  there  to  commune  with  the  god,  stated  by  Lucian  to 
have  lasted  for  seven  days,  was  carried  on  extravagantly  into  Christianity  by  St. 
Simon  Stylites.  The  nature  and  the  later  name  of  the  worship — Aten — therefore 
bear  out  the  origin  inferred  from  its  position  in  Egypt. 

The  Hudet  worship,  of  the  flying  sun  with  wings,  centred  at  Edfu.  Arising 
so  far  south  suggests  that  it  came  by  the  Berenice  road,  which  led  into  the  Nile 
Valley  opposite  Edfu,  passing  the  desert  temple  of  Redesieh.  Hence  it  is  to  the 
Red  Sea  or  Arabia  that  we  should  look  for  its  origin.  A  Semitic  source  is 
suggested  by  the  Hebrew  huhd,  "splendour,"  which  seems  likely  to  be  the  source  of 
the  Egyptian  name.  As  we  have  noticed,  it  was  from  Edfu  that  the  historic  myth 
describes  Horus  as  going  to  found  the  Samhud  cities  of  Middle  and  Northern 
Egypt,  "  united  with  Hudet."  There  is  thus  no  question  as  to  the  starting  of  the 
worship  from  Edfu. 

Min  is  another  god  who  certainly  came  in  from  the  Red  Sea,  but  by  the 
Koptos  road,  along  which  he  was  especially  adored,  and  from  which  his  worship 
spread  up  and  down  the  Nile.  Not  only  was  his  mother  Khenti-abti,  "  the  leader 
of  the  East,"  but  the  detail  of  the  shrine  as.sociated  with   Min   is  well   shown 


The  Geography  of  the  Gods.  119 

{Athribis,  8,  PL  XX)  as  a  conical  hut,  like  those  of  the  land  of  Punt,  and  it  is 
stated  (on  PI.  XVIII)  to  be  a  building  of  Punt.  Hence  Min  was  derived  from 
Punt,  the  modern  Yemen,  or  else  Eritrea. 

Three  godg^Jiave  very  closely  the  same  distribution  in  North  and  South,  and 
being  on  the  east  and  not  the  west  of  the  Delta  they  must  be  supposed  to  have 
come  from  the  Red  Sea ;  two  of  them  are  connected,  Set  and  Nebhat,  but  the 
third,  Mut,  seems  to  be  quite  apart.  That  Set  is  closely  similar  to  Sutekh  there 
can  be  no  question.  Set  was  the  god  of  the  desert,  and  Sutekh  was  the  god  of  the 
Hyksos  desert-dwellers.  As  the  Hyksos  were  eastern,  and  probably  Semitic,  so 
Set  must  have  had  a  like  origin.  The  second  prehistoric  civilisation,  which  came 
from  the  east,  is  therefore  probably  the  source  of  this  worship.  The  attack  of  Set 
on  Osiris  is  the  account  of  the  second  civilisation  attacking  the  worship  of  the 
previous  age.  The  conquest  of  Set  by  Horus  of  Edfu  is  the  account  of  the 
subduing  of  the  easterners  of  the  second  civilisation,  by  the  reviving  strength  of  the 
westerners  of  the  Osiris  group.  If  Set  is  thus  connected  with  the  second  race,  who 
.seem  by  their  productions  to  have  come  down  from  the  eastern  mountains,  may 
not  the  steps  which  he  guards,  leading  up  to  the  sky,  be  the  ascent  of  those 
mountains  ?  Though  they  are  not  quite  as  high  as  Parnassus  or  Olympus,  they 
might  likewise  be  looked  on  as  the  dwelling  of  the  gods,  and  the  ascent  be  there- 
fore the  steps  up  to  heaven.  The  regular  title  of  Set,  Nubti,  may  refer  to  the  verb 
nub,  "  to  fashion,  or  model  "  ;  thus  Set  would  be  the  Creator,  like  Khnem  or  Ptah, 
fashioning  mankind.  The  rival,  Horus,  then  similarly  was  entitled  Hor  Nubti, 
Horus  the  creator,  taking  away  the  old  title  of  Set.  The  position  of  Nebhat  as 
wife  of  Set  is  strongly  supported  by  the  distribution  of  her  worship  being  the  same 
as  that  of  Set.  This  serves  to  show  that  her  place  in  the  Osiris  group  is  a 
.secondary  adaptation  of  the  mythology,  and  that  primarily  she  came  in  from  the 
Red  Sea  with  Set.  Mut,  the  mother-god,  is  shown  by  the  distribution  of  the 
worship,  to  have  had  a  similar  history.  The  name  is  purely  Egyptian,  and 
probably,  therefore,  a  translation  of  the  name  in  the  original  country  of  the  goddess. 

The  general  diffusion  of  the  worship  of  Hathor,  and  her  identification  with 
many  other  deities  or  genii,  points  to  her  belonging  to  the  dynastic  people,  as 
already  stated.  The  movement  of  the  dynastic  people  appears  to  have  been  by 
sea,  round  from  the  Persian  Gulf  and  up  the  Red  Sea  into  Egypt  (Ancient 
Egypt,  1917,  34,  36).  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to  connect  their  goddess  Hathor 
with  the  West  Arabian  goddess  Athirat,  who  was  probably  the  Ashtoreth  of 
Canaan.  In  Arabia  she  was  the  wife  of  the  Moon-god ;  but  among  races  where 
the  moon  was  feminine  she  became  the  Moon-god,  wearing  the  disk  of  the  moon 
in  Egypt  with  the  horns  of  Ashtoreth  Karnaim — ''  the  horned  " — as  emblem  of 
the  crescent  moon. 

The  geography  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  is  thus  seen  to  have  a  considerable 
value  historically,  as  bearing  on  their  origins  and  connections.  When  more 
complete  research  into  the  localities  of  various  uncertain  names  may  extend  our 
identifications,  it  will  be  possible  to  get  more  light  on  the  sources  of  Egyptian 
mythology. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 


H  4 


(       I20      ) 


A  STATUETTE  OF  KHONSU. 

The  statuette  which  is  here  reproduced  represents  the  god  Khonsu  in  mummified 
form,  standing  up,  holding  the  whip  in  his  right  hand  and  the  crook  in  the  left, 

while  with  both  hands  he  grasps  a  sceptre  composed  of  |  and  u,  the  •¥■  being 

also  held  in  the  left  hand.  He  wears  the  side-lock  of  youth,  and  on  the  top  of  the 
head  is  the  depression  in  which  was  originally  fixed  the  lunar  disk  and  crescent. 
The  work  is  of  bronze,  which  has  suffered  to  some  extent  from  oxidation.  The 
wrappings  of  the  body  are  covered  with  an  elaborate  design  in  electrum,  the 
eyes,  eye-brows,  beard,  headdress,  collar,  and  bracelets  being  picked  out  in  gold. 
The  god  stands  upon  two  plinths  ;  steps  have  been  cut  in  the  front  of  the  smaller 

and  its  sides  are  decorated  with  a  repetition  of  the  si<;ns  I  TTJ  in  electrum,  while 
the  upper  surface  and  sides  of  the  larger  bear  an  inscription.  In  its  actual  state, 
after  the  loss  of  the  lunar  disk,  the  work  stands  2i  inches  high ;  the  inscribed 
plinth  measures  i-^^  inch  by  |  inch.  It  is  a  very  fine  specimen  of  Saite  craftsman- 
ship, if,  indeed,  it  does  not  date  from  an  earlier  period.  A  point  of  special  interest 
is  the  unusual  position  of  the  head  of  the  .1.     If  the  figures  of  gods  in,  e.^.,  the 

Cairo  collection  (Daressy,  Statues  de  divinites)  are  examined,  it  will  be  observed 
that  the  side  of  the  head  generally  faces  the  spectator,  whereas  in  the  specimen 
here  figured  we  see  the  front.  Among  the  few  instances  of  the  latter  arrangement 
at  Cairo  are  three  statuettes  of  Ptah  38445,  38449,  and  38,453).  In  the  two 
former  the  top  of  the  sceptre  joins  the  lower  part  of  the  beard  ;  in  the  third,  as  in 
our  specimen,  it  is  under  the  beard. 

On  the  upper  surface  of  the  plinth,  facing  the  god,   are  three  columns  of 
hieroglyphs : — 


W  1: 


®  ^   D 

"  Khonsu  in  Thebes,  Nefer-hetep." 

On  the  front  of  the  plinth,  and  evidently  intended  to  be  read  with  the  above,  is 
with  *<=3L  on  either  side,  "  His  name  which  he  loves."     Along  the  sides  of  the 
plinth,  meeting  at  the  back,  run  two  lines  of  inscription  : — 


0 


T  cr  flflll  ^™° 


"  May  he  reward  Uaua-ur,  son  of  Pen-Ptah,  for  what  he  has  done." 


A   Statuette  of  Khonsu, 

^      ^„      C^ 


121 


flfllfilPli.P^ 


(sic) 


"  May  he  protect  Uaua-ur,  born  of  Mukhiy,  from  all  evil." 


GOLD-INI.AYED  STATUETTE   OF   KHONSU. 

Enlarged  to  double  size. 

The  inscription  is  quite  an  exceptional  one,  and  very  different  from  the  prayers 
for  life,  health,  and  strength  which  such  figures  usually  bear.  A  rather  long 
inscription  on  a  statue  of  Ta-urt  at  Cairo  (39,147)  includes  a  phrase  similar  in 
sense  but  expressed  in  other  words. 

The  figure  is  the  property  of  Messrs.  Spink  and  Son,  who  have  kindly  allowed 
me  to  publish  it. 

F.  W.  Read. 


(       122 


xNEW  PARTICULARS  CONCERNING  THE  PRAEFECTI  AEGYPTI. 

The  twelfth  volume  of  the  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri  furnishes  a  good  deal  of  fresh 
evidence  concerning  the  Praefecti  Aegypti,  because  of  the  numerous  references  in 
its  texts,  in  distinctly  dated  documents,  to  prefects  already  known  ;  and  also  because 
these  restore  to  history  some  half-dozen  or  more  new  names  and  their  periods  of 
office  for  prefects  and  vice-prefects.  The  new  material  mostly  relates  to  prefects 
of  the  second  and  third  centuries,  and  therefore  the  following  remarks  will  chiefly 
be  concerned  with  the  Imperial  governors  during  those  periods. 

Upon  the  commencement  of  the  discoveries  of  papyri  of  the  Roman  era,  the 
succession  of  the  prefects  was  discussed  by  Milne,  Offord  and  De  Ricci,  but  has 
since  been  much  more  completely  worked  out  by  Cantarelli,  whose  treatise  is  well 
known  to  all  papyrologists.  The  matter  has  also  been  studied  by  Dattari,  whose 
erudition  as  a  numismatist  is  well  known,  with  the  intention  of  publishing  a 
"  Cronologia  dei  Prefetti  D'Egitto,"  and  I  am  indebted  to  him  for  a  copy  of  his 
tabular  arrangement  of  the  prefects  made  some  four  years  ago.  before  the  appear- 
ance of  the  last  two  volumes  of  the  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri  and  two  parts  of  the 
Florence  Papyri,  and  several  volumes  of  the  Berlin  Griecliische  Urkuuden. 

Papyrus  1547  gives  a  document  dated  in  A.u.  119,  as  engrossed  under  the 
regime  of  Quintus  Ramnius  Martialis,  for  whom  we  previously  had  an  inscription 
of  A.D.  118.  Between  this  date  and  A.D.  131,  only  one  prefect's  name  was  derivable 
from  previously  published  papyri.  Dattari,  however,  in  this  gap,  probably  from 
information  from  coins,  placed  a  Marcus  Moesianus  and  a  Claudius  Julius. 
Nothing  corroborating  their  position  as  prefects  appears  in  these  new  papyri. 

Papyrus  145 1  decides  that  A.D.  175  was  one  of  the  years  of  office  of  Gaius 
(FlaviusJ  Calvisius  Statianus.  The  praenomen  given  him  by  Dio  Cassius  is 
omitted  in  the  manuscript.  His  name  has  been  found  in  an  inscription  at  Verona  ; 
see  Cor.  Ins.  Lat.,  V,  3336.  Between  this  prefect  and  T  (or  L)  Pactumeius  Magnus, 
Dattari  places  a  Claudius  Julianus,  but  does  not  say  upon  what  evidence. 

We  now  arrive  at  one  of  the  entirely  new  names,  that  of  (Lucius)  Baebus 
Aurelius  Juncinus,  for  the  years  A. D.  210  to  214 — years  to  which  Dattari  assigns 
M.  Duca  Fluminianus — e.xcepting  that  the  cognomen  juncinus  appeared  upon  a 
papyrus  now  at  Giessen. 

In  their  comments  concerning  prefects  of  this  period,  Drs.  Grenfell  and  Hunt 
mention  that,  for  the  year  A.D.  241,  a  Strasburg  papyrus  gives  a  name  Annianus. 

The  date  of  A.D.  245  is  now  provided  for  Valerius  Firmus,  for  whom  an 
Amherst  papyrus  also  gave  246  or  247. 

A  Florence  papyrus  appears  to  assign  Aurelius  Basileus  to  A.D.  245. 

Ox.  Papyrus  1468  gives  a  fresh  name,  Titianus  Claudianus,  who  was  in  office 
subsequent  to  A.D.  230,  but  before  258.     He  may  have  only  been  a  vice-prefect. 

Lucius  Mussius  Aemilianus,  deputy  prefect  of  Papyrus  1468  of  A.D.  258,  also 
to  be  found  in  Ox.  Papyrus  1201,  appears  to  be  identical  with  De  Ricci's  "  Marcus 
Julius  (?)  Aemilianus."  In  a  Rylands  papyrus  he  is  styled  praef(ectus).  Another 
Rylands  papyrus,  Dr.  Grenfell  mentions,  gives  a  prefect  Koua<j<»>vi.o<;  for  the 
thirteenth  year  of  Gallienus. 


New  Particulars  concerning  the  Praefecti  Aegypti.  123 

If  L.  M.  Aemilianus  was  prefect  in  a.d.  258,  he  clashes  with  M.  Marcus 
Brundisianus,  whom  Dattari,  on  the  authority  of  Botti,  places  in  that  year. 

Papyrus  1467  contains  a  petition  to  a  prefect  whose  name  is  missing.  It  is  of 
the  year  A.D.  2$^,  and  the  editors  suggest  the  prefect  was  Aurelius  Theodotus, 
known  to  us  from  a  Strasburg  papyrus.     This  name  was  given  by  Cantarelli. 

In  a  previous  volume  of  the  Oxyrhynchus  Texts  IX,  Papyrus  1191  introduced 
a  prefect  for  A.D.  280  to  281,  whose  name,  Hadrianus  Sallustius,  is  to  be  found  in 
Amherst  Papyrus  137. 

Another  new  name  is  Marcus  Aurelius  Diogenes,  A.D.  284  to  286,  Papyrus  1456, 
"successor  to  Pomponius  Januarianus,  Ox.  Papyrus  1115,  but  previous  to  Flavius 
Valerius  Pompeianus,  who  held  office  in  287. 

In  A.D.  298,  Papyrus  1469  presents  a  fresh  name,  that  of  Aemilius  Rusticianus, 
a  deputy  prefect.  The  text  terms  him,  "  the  most  illustrious  deputy  in  the  most 
eminent  office  of  prefect." 

In  the  following  year  Papyrus  1416  gives  (Aelius)  Publius,  whom  Ox.  Papyrus 
1204,  had  already  revealed  to  us. 

Papyrus  1558  presents  a  new  prefect  name,  that  of  Fl.  Julius  Ammonius  ; 
he  is  entitled  prefect  of  Augustamnica,  and  so  must  be  dated  subsequent  to 
A.D.  341,  when  the  districts  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis  and  Babylon  took 
that  name.  One  of  the  new  documents  is  a  letter  from  a  high  official  named 
Nicon,  who  may  have  been  a  prefect,  but  the  editors,  from  further  information  in  a 
Leipzig  papyrus,  think  he  was  a  Praeses. 

Cantarelli  was  able,  from  references  to  him  in  the  work  of  St.  Athanasius,  to 
place  a  Philagrius  as  prefect  A.D.  334  to  336.  His  name  occurs  now  twice  in 
Ox.  Papyrus  1470,  and  so  is  certified  by  this  new  form  of  historical  evidence. 

A  prefect,  F.  Entolmius  Tatianus,  in  power  from  A.D.  367  to  370,  was  only 
known  from  Suidas  and  Photius,  but  he  is  mentioned  in  0.x.  Papyrus  iioi. 
According  to  the  Chronicle  Puteanum,  he  continued  in  office  for  a  second  time 
up  to  A.D.  373.  See  also  John  of  Nikiu  c.  82,  and  Cod.  Theod,  XII,  18,  i. 
According  to  the  Egyptian  Gazette  the  name  of  a  prefect  Urulius  Genus  has  been 
found  in  the  Roman  forum  at  Luqsor. 

Joseph  Offord. 


(     124     ) 


PERIODICALS. 


Annates  du  Service  des  Antiqidtds  de  V &gypt.     Tome  XV, 

Fasc.  iii. 

{Continued from  ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1916,/.  39.) 

Ahmed  Bey  Kamal. — Le  Tombeau  nouveau  de  M^tr.  This  is  a  description 
of  a  finely  decorated  tomb  of  Pepy-onkh-her-ab,  and  copy  of  the  inscriptions, 
occupying  fifty  pages.  The  burial  had  been  anciently  destroyed  and  the  coffin 
broken,  but  much  was  left  of  the  funeral  furniture.  The  .scenes,  inscriptions  and 
lists  are  of  the  same  character  as  those  of  other  tombs  at  Meir  and  Deshasheh, 
and  we  may  hope  that  soon  Mr.  Blackman  will  be  able  to  continue  his  work  and 
copy  this  uninjured  tomb  as  carefully  as  he  has  done  others.  In  the  burial  pit 
of  Pepy-onkh-her-ab  there  was  much  pottery,  food  offerings,  copper  saucers  con- 
taining bread,  and  seven  alabaster  vases.  In  the  pit  of  his  wife  Aoh-hat  was  a 
mirror,  arms  of  a  wooden  statuette,  two  flint  knives,  two  alabaster  vases,  a  very 
rare  copper  kohl-pot  and  stick,  five  model  axes,  seven  knives,  seven  adzes,  seven 
chisels,  eight  other  tools  of  copper,  etc.  In  the  serdab  was  a  group  of  two 
figures  of  the  owner  and  wife  seated,  carved  in  limestone  about  life  size,  without 
inscription. 

Dares.SY,  G. —  Un  Monument  du  temps  des  Hyksos.  This  is  a  block  of  lime- 
stone found  by  Prof  Naville  at  Tell  Maskhuta,  and  supposed  to  be  of  the  XXth 
dynasty.  M.  Daressy  detects  that  it  is  a  much  older  monument,  which  has  been 
recut  with  later  details  under  Sety  I.  It  is  suggested  that  it  was  carved  in  the 
Xlllth  dynasty,  and  represented  a  king  warring  on  the  incoming  Hyksos.  The 
original  god  figured  was  Hor-Sopdu. 

Legrain,  G. — Le  premier  Prophkte  dAmon,  Ap-ouaitou-mes.  Four  fragments 
of  a  wooden  box  from  Thebes  bear  the  name  of  the  hereditary  prince,  chief  prophet 
of  Amen  over  all  the  prophets  of  Thebes,  Upuatmes.  This  is  probably  about  the 
time  of  Amenhetep  III. 

Legrain,  G. — La  Litanie  de  Ouasit.  This  text  from  the  south-east  of  the 
hypostyle  hall  of  Karnak  is  compared  with  a  duplicate  of  Ramessu  III,  and  here 
published  in  parallel  columns.  The  goddess  Uast  is  Hathor  of  Thebes,  and  it  is 
stated  that  all  the  goddesses  beseech  her  to  be  favourable ;  the  goddesses  are 
named  in  geographical  order  from  the  Cataract  down  to  Heliopolis. 

Legrain,  G. — Les  dhse  Shahdidiyt.  This  goddess  is  known  in  five  personal 
names,  but  not  from  other  sources ;  the  type  of  name  seems  to  be  foreign.  The 
names  are  on  a  squatting  statue  in  diorite  of  Pedashahdidiyt  (Posno) ;  a  steatite 
statuette  of  P-sa-na-mut  son  of  Pedashahthetthet  (Naples) ;  a  figure  of  Khonsu 
dedicated   by    Pedashahthetht   son  of  Horuza  (Cairo) ;  a  stele  of  Pedashahtheth 


Annates  du  Service.  125 

son  of  Hor  (Louvre) ;  and  an  ushabti  of  Pakhadas  son  of  Tashadyd  (Vatican). 
It  seems  not  impossible  that  tlie  first  four  are  all  of  one  man.  It  appears  likely 
that  this  is  the  Arabic  shadyd,  "  intense,  mighty,"  the  mighty  goddess  ?  The  root 
is  an  early  one,  as  in  Hebrew  El-Shaddai,  the  Almighty ;  shiddah,  "  a  mistress." 

Tome  XVI. 

Dakessv,  G. — La  Statue  dun  Astronome.  This  is  a  black  granite  statue, 
twenty-five  inches  high,  from  Tell  Ferain,  otherwise  known  as  Nebesheh.  Down 
the  back  pier  are  three  columns  of  inscription,  of  which  a  few  signs  are  missing 
at  the  bottom,  where  the  feet  are  broken  away.  The  text  ends  in  two  columns 
on  the  flat  surface  behind  the  left  leg.  As  the  text  is  unique  in  subject,  the  whole 
of  M.  Daressy's  rendering  is  here  quoted  : — 

"  The  heir  and  prince,  sole  friend,  versed  in  science,  observer  of  all  phenomena, 
celestial  and  terrestrial,  skilful  for  observing  the  stars  without  neglecting  half  of 
them,  tracing  a  horoscope  based  on  their  positions  and  the  gods  who  rule  destiny ; 
having  been  instructed  about  them  and  their  days,  about  the  influence  that  Venus 
has  on  the  earth,  he  makes  glad  the  land  by  his  predictions.     Observing  every 

culmination  in  the  sky,  knowing  the  rising  of (he  indicates)  every  feast 

at  its  right  time  ;  announcing  the  rising  of  Sirius  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  he 
observes  the  day  of  its  feast ;  having  calculated  its  coming  at  the  epochs  assigned, 
observing  all  that  it  does  every  day,  all  that  it  regulates  is  known  to  him.  Knowing 
the  northing  and  the  southing  of  the  Aten,  he  measures  all  its  variations,  he  uses 
them  to  show  the  hour  by  the  sun,  determining  their  coming  at  their  moment,  and 
the  hourly  changes  in  the  time  of  obscurity.     The  movement  of  the  star  of  Horus 

in  the  sky perceiving  the  things  of  the  master,  that  which  he  observes 

in  the  sky  he  applies  to  the  earth.     Knowing  their  breath No  objector 

rose  up, against  his  decision  after  he  had  decided  a  matter  according  to  all  that  he 
observed,  no  master  could  reverse  one  of  his  counsels  to  the  Lord  of  the  Two  Lands. 
Subduing  the  scorpions,  knowing  the  retreat  of  reptiles,  showing  their  place  and 
extracting  their  serpents,  shutting  the  mouth  of  their  inhabitants,  their  serpents 

initiated  in  the  mysteries,  favouring  his  travels  and  protecting  his 

ways,  mastering  the  adversaries  of  his  expedition making  him  happy 

by  his  counsel,  god  making  his  love  as  the  master  of  the  scorpion,  Horkhebt,  son 

of  the  devoted  to  Uazet "     Thus  Horkhebt  was  astronomer,  astrologer, 

regulator  of  the  calendar,  magician  and  councillor. 

Cledat,  Jean. — Fouilles  a  Khirbet  el-Flousiyeh.  This  site  is  the  ancient 
Ostracine,  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Serbonian  lake,  Sebkhat  Bardowil, 
rather  more  than  halfway  from  the  Suez  Canal  to  Gaza.  The  ruins  are  in  a 
marshy  plain,  inaccessible  during  much  of  the  year,  like  Pelusium,  showing  how 
the  sinking  of  the  Delta  coast  extends  toward  Syria.  Nothing  is  known  here 
before  the  Roman  period  ;  the  place  was  best  known  in  Byzantine  times,  and  until 
1302,  when  it  was  finally  ruined  by  an  earthquake.  Two  churches  and  a  fortress 
were  excavated  by  M.  Cledat.  The  buildings  are  all  of  cut  stone,  and  burnt  brick 
is  very  unusual ;  the  crude  brick  building  is  Arab.  The  fortress  is  an  irregular 
pentagon,  about  800  feet  across.  The  wall  is  6  feet  thick,  built  of  a  hard  concrete 
of  flints,  chips,  plaster,  and  sand,  faced  with  cut  stone.  The  facing  blocks  are 
some  as  much  as  3  feet  long,  and  the  courses  usually  16  inches,  in  regular  lines. 
Beams  of  timber  are  laid  through  the  mass  to  strengthen  it.     The  walls  of  the 


126  Annales  du  Service. 

churches  are  similar,  but  those  of  the  private  houses,  being  only  15  or  20  inches 
thick,  are  simply  of  two  facing  stones  filled  in  with  plaster,  with  some  headers  to 
bond  it.  In  the  fortress  the  sand  has  blown  in  over  a  dozen  feet  deep;  the  walls 
are  believed  to  have  been  20  or  24  feet  high. 

The  southern  basilica  was,  over  all,  203  feet  by  72  feet,  the  walls  3  to  5  feet  thick. 
The  atrium  was  60  feet  square,  with  colonnades  on  three  sides.  There  were  three 
doors  into  the  narthex.  The  church  proper  was  172  feet  by  64  feet.  All  the  tombs 
are  now  under  water.  The  northern  basilica  is  not  so  large,  the  church  proper 
being  65  feet  by  33  feet.  Both  the  basilicas  were  apsidal,  with  the  bishop's  throne 
in  the  back  of  the  apse,  and  the  altar  in  an  enclosure  free  standing,  between  two 
bays  of  the  nave.  In  the  northern  church  the  throne  is  free  standing,  approached 
by  four  steps,  and  behind  it,  with  access  on  either  side,  is  a  sub-apse,  the  structure 
of  which  is  not  clear.  M.  Cledat  does  not  seem  to  recognise  the  early  apsidal 
position  of  the  bishop's  throne,  as  in  the  early  basilicas  of  Rome.  All  of  the 
buildings  have  suffered  greatly  by  the  abstraction  of  the  marble  linings  and  the 
cut  stone  masonry. 

LoRET,  Victor. —  Quelques  Notes  sur  I'arbre  Ach.  This  is  a  reply  to  the 
paper  by  M.  Ducros,  see  ANCIENT  Egypt,  1916,  p.  34.  The  various  characteristics 
of  the  ash  wood  are  collected.  It  produced  tar  or  pitch,  it  was  used  to  make 
coffins  of  the  priests,  its  gum  is  represented  in  red  lumps  in  the  tomb  of  Rekhmara, 
it  was  the  wood  for  beams  up  to  19  cubits  long,  masts  for  boats  up  to  22  cubits, 
and  even  42  cubits,  and  masts  for  pylons  up  to  60  cubits  (103  feet)  high.  The 
great  pylon  of  Karnak  would  need  masts  170  feet  high.  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  a  very  large  conifer  is  the  tree  in  question.  M.  Loret  gives  up  entirely  his 
former  proposal  of  ^cd«a  j^j'rt/,  and  states  the  thirteen  different  conifers  found  in 
Syria,  from  whence  the  ask  was  brought.  These  are  all  inapplicable  for  various 
reasons,  excepting  the  Abies  cilicica,  the  Cilician  Pine,  which  grows  to  50  feet 
in  the  Taurus  range,  and  up  to  100  or  150  feet  in  the  Lebanon.  The  great 
masts  are  called  by  the  Egyptians  the  " true  ash"  implying  that  there  was  an 
inferior  tree  similar  to  it.  As  the  Abies  cannot  grow  on  the  sea  plain,  as  described 
in  the  tale  of  Bata,  M.  Loret  proposed  to  see  the  inferior  ash  in  Piiius pinea,  which, 
in  Syria,  reaches  to  65  feet  high,  and  which  grows  down  to  the  shore.  For  most 
purposes  this  more  accessible  tree  would  be  the  ash  of  the  Egyptians,  but  for  the 
greatest  masts  they  obtained  the  largest  conikx,  Abies,  and  called  it  the  "true  ask." 

Thomas,  Ernest  S. — An  Unexplained  Object  depicted  on  the  Tombof  Hesy.  The 
object  has  been  supposed  to  be  a  form  of  sieve,  but  Mr.  Thomas  suggests  that  it  is 
a  sectional  view  of  the  cylindrical  measures  of  capacity  nested  one  in  another.  In 
a  later  age,  when  modes  of  drawing  were  fixed,  such  a  representation  would  be 
impossible,  but  as  the  drawing  of  series  of  objects  was  only  starting  about  the 
time  of  Hesy,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  artist  was  feeling  about  for  modes  of 
expression.  The  highly  mechanical  genius  of  that  age  might  well  have  conceived 
of  a  section  of  a  group. 

Daressy,  G. — Fragment  de  Socle  de  Statue  provenant  d'Aihribis.  This  gives 
the  titles  of  the  high  priest  and  others  of  Athribis.  The  persons  are  Mer-hor-tef-ef, 
Tehuti-her,  Haqerut,  Pef-bastet,  Pedakhut,  Pen-khebt-uzu,  Horta,  Hor-hetep,  and 
Zeher. 


Annales  du  Service.  127 

DaresSY,  G. — Stele  de  la  XIXe  dynastic  avec  textes  du  Livre  des  Pyramides. 
These  texts  are  found  in  Unas  11.  5  tog,  Merenra  11.  172-173,  Unas  11.  479-488, 
Pepy  I  11.  638-641,  Merenra  11.  66t-6ti,  Unas  11.  526-531,  591,  Pepy  1.  680.  The 
persons  represented  are  named  Bakt,  Huy,  Nay,  Ptahmery,  Nefertari,  Ho-nefer-atu, 
Ptahmay,  Nesut-ifba-oo  named  Thaiu,  Rennut. 

DareS-SY,  G. — Fragment  Mendesien.  The  top  of  the  back  pier  of  a  black 
basalt  statue  naming  the  deities  of  Mendes,  Horpakhred,  Ba,  and  Hatmehet 
Usertsat. 

Daressy,  G. — Le  Fils  atnd  de  Chechanq  III.  On  a  stele  of  the  14th  year, 
the  king's  eldest  son  is  named  Baken-nefi  ;  he  gave  lands  at  Heliopolis  as  endow- 
ment. The  persons  named  are  Peda-bast  son  of  Tada-bast,  Pa-khred-ast,  and 
Nes-un-nefer. 

Daressy,  G. — La  Chaussee  de  Mentouhotep  V.  This  calls  attention  to  the 
discovery  of  a  paved  road  50  feet  wide,  which  M.  Daressy  followed  for  260  feet, 
just  south  of  the  Ramesseum,  between  that  and  the  chapel  of  Uazmes.  This 
appears  to  be  the  lower  end  of  the  causeway  leading  along  the  southern  side  of  the 
Deir  el-Bahri  bay,  as  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Winlock,  see  Ancient  Egypt,  1916, 
p.  83. 

Ahmed  Bey  Kamal. — Fouilles  a  Deir  Dronka  et  a  Assiout.  This  is  a  list 
of  one  hundred  and  sixty-one  objects  dug  out  in  the  plundering  by  Sayed  Bey 
Kashaba,  without  any  record,  in  the  manner  usual  fifty  years  ago.  From  inscribed 
coffins  down  to  ushabtis,  everything  is  without  history  or  connection.  The 
continued  wreckage  of  the  remaining  antiquities  of  the  country,  under  the  patronage 
of  the  Department  of  Antiquities,  is  inexplicable  and  inexcusable  at  the  present 
day. 

Daressy,  G. —  Un  Sarcophage  de  Toiinah.  This  is  one  of  the  clumsy  granite 
sarcophagi  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  90  inches  long,  34  inches  wide.  It  was  at  the 
bottom  of  a  pit  })'j  feet  deep,  but  it  had  been  completely  plundered,  and  no  other 
objects  were  with  it.  The  deceased  was  Tehutmes,  keeper  of  the  cattle  of  Amen, 
as  he  is  usually  described,  and  perhaps  the  same  as  the  owner  of  the  large  lazuli 
scarab,  in  Scarabs,  xxxviii,  31.  He  also  had  the  titles  of  great  keeper  of  the  cattle 
of  Amen  in  the  south  and  north,  royal  scribe,  keeper  of  the  palace,  over  the  works 
of  the  king,  over  the  messengers  {nptu),  over  the  works  in  the  temple  of  Tehuti, 
declarer  of  truth  {up  in&ot),  over  the  granaries  of  the  temple  of  Amen,  over  the 
house  in  the  divine  pylon  made  for  him  to  his  lord. 

Daressy,  G. —  Un  Naos  de  Domitien.  This  shrine  is  of  limestone,  25  inches 
wide,  and  42  high.  It  has  been  damaged,  but  the  back  bears  a  long  hymn  to 
Tut,  in  seven  columns.  This  Tut  is  a  lion-god,  hitherto  unknown,  and  said  to 
"judge  in  the  double  hall  of  truth  at  Heliopolis." 

Daressy,  G. — Gaston  Maspero.  This  is  a  recital  of  the  official  work  of  the 
late  Director,  without  any  personal  note,  or  any  of  the  intimate  detail  which  might 
have  illustrated  his  character,  from  one  who  knew  him  so  well. 


128  Annates  du  Service. 

Barsanti,  a. —  Travaux  exicutis  aux  Monuments  de  Philae.  Since  the  inun- 
dation of  Philae,  shipping  and  steam  tugs  wander  over  the  temples  and  do  serious 
damage.  An  obelisli  was  brol<en  and  overthrown,  and  three  columns  and  archi- 
traves were  shifted.  These  have  been  rebuilt,  but  the  risk  of  damage  is  obvious, 
and  a  fence  of  booms  would  seem  to  be  urgently  required  around  the  buildings  to 
prevent  their  gradual  overthrow. 

Lecrain,  G. — La  Statuette  de  Hor.  This  is  a  squatting  figure,  with  the  arms 
round  the  knees,  i6  inches  high,  of  green  basalt,  found  in  the  sebakh  at  Dendereh. 
The  exact  similarity  to  another  figure  dated  to  Psamtek  I,  serves  to  fix  the  age 
of  this.     It  is  of  Hor  son  of  Zed-tehuti-au-onkh  son  of  Pesthenfi. 

Legrain,  G. —  Trots  Regies  gradates.  These  are  three  basalt  cubit  rods,  which 
were  found  complete  in  the  sebakh  at  Dendereh.  One  bears  a  demotic  dedica- 
tion to  Hathor  of  Dendereh  by  "  Pana  son  of  Psibast,  the  man  of  Sardes,  and 
Pet-hor-suten-ta  son  of  Pana  son  of  Lebren."  From  the  writing,  this  is  dated 
about  200  H.C.  Only  the  total  lengths  and  breadths  are  stated,  20'8  inches, 
21  inches  and  20'8  inches  long;  i'5  inch  square  and  the  latter  two  i  inch  square. 
The  whole  of  the  divisions  need  to  be  accurately  measured.  The  lines  on  the 
inscribed  cubit  are,  on  1st  face  palms,  the  end  ones  divided  into  digits,  one  end 
digit  in  half  and  quarters ;  2nd  face,  the  end  quarter  divided  into  '03,  06,  "i,  •125, 
•2,  '25  of  the  whole,  evidently  a  decimal  division  ;  3rd  face,  in  6  palms,  one  end  palm 
is  thirds,  the  other  quarters,  the  end  quarter  in  half  and  quarters.  Thus  there  is 
here  the  usual  7  palm  division,  the  rare  decimal  division,  and  the  almost  unknown 
6  palm  division.  The  second  cubit  is  divided  on  three  faces  into  5,  6,  and  7  palms 
respectively,  the  same  system  as  the  previous.  The  third  cubit  has  the  four  faces 
divided  into  4,  5,  6  and  7  palms. 

Legrain,  G. — Observation  dun  Plienomhie  optique.  It  is  remarked  that  the 
statues  of  Ptah  and  Sekhmet,  in  their  sanctuary  at  Karnak,  show  patches  of  polish 
on  parts  of  the  surface ;  the  feet  and  the  left  hand  of  Sekhmet  especially.  These 
seem  to  be  parts  which  were  touched  by  worshippers,  like  the  foot  of  St.  Peter  at 
Rome.  Also  other  statues,  especially  those  of  Amenhetep  son  of  Hapi,  who  was 
an  intercessor,  and  of  Ramessu,  the  founder  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  show  patches  of 
wear  by  touching.  This  implies  that  vast  numbers  must  have  come  to  these  statues 
to  thus  polish  the  granite  by  light  friction,  and  suggests  that  the  .shrines  were  open 
to  all  worshippers. 

The  optical  phenomenon  is  the  familiar  change  of  lighting  by  the  passage  of 
clouds  over  the  sky  opening,  like  the  shadow  figures  seen  in  some  Coptic  churches 
lighted  through  small  side  openings. 

^yEGRAlN,  G. —  Une  statue  de  Horoudja  fits  de  Haroua.  Five  statues  of  this 
prince  are  known,  and  now  a  si.xth  has  been  found  at  Dendereh.  It  is  a  squatting 
figure  of  "  the  hereditary  prince,  high  priest  of  Heliopolis,  Horuza  son  of  Harua," 
of  the  same  titles. 

Legrain,  G. —  Un  Miracle  d'Ahvics  \"\  A  stele  shows  the  bark  of  Nebpehtira 
Aohmes  on  the  shoulders  of  eight  ]jriests,  conducted  by  the  prophet  Paari,  and 
before  it  is  the  priest  of  Osiris,  Pasar,  adoring.     Below  is  the  inscription,  "year  14 


i 


Annales  du  Service.  129 

Paophi  25  (B.C.  1287,  Aug.  21),  in  the  reign  of  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt, 

usermdotra  setep  ne  .  .  .  .     Son  of  the  Sun messu,  giving  life,  the  day  of 

the  coming  of  the  priest  Pasar  with  the  priest  Thay  to  bring  (the  oracle)  Nebpehra. 
The  priest  Pasarj<^ame  to  the  field  which  belonged  (to  my)  son.  He  heard  the 
(clamours  ?)  of  the  children  of  the  people.  Was  the  god  to  establish  (the  truth  ?). 
Came  the  god  at  the  saying,  '  It  belongs  to  Pasar  son  of  Mes,'  and  the  god  became 
very  heavy  in  the  presence  of  the  priests  of  Pehnebra,  the  prophet  Paari,  the  for- 
ward priest  Ynuzabu,  the  ( )  priest  Thanefer,  the  backward  priest  Nekht, 

the  backward  priest  Tehutimes.  Made  by  the  sculptor  scribe  of  the  temple  of 
Amenmery  Rameses  in  the  temple  of  Osiris,  Nebmehy." 

This  dispute  about  the  ownership  of  a  field  was  settled  by  the  oracle  of 
Aohmes  I.  His  bark  was  borne  by  the  priests  into  the  field,  and  when  asked  if  it 
belonged  to  the  priest-claimant,  these  bearers  declared  that  it  became  very  heavy. 
This  is  precisely  the  belief  of  the  modern  Theban.  A  sealed  declaration  of  the 
bearers  of  the  bier  of  Sheykh  es-Sayd  Yusuf  states  that  when  they  reached  the 
side  of  the  shrine  of  Sheykh  Abu-el-Abbas,  the  bier  became  so  heavy  that  they 
could  not  proceed.  It  seems  likely  that  the  previous  translations  about  the  god 
bowing  in  response  really  refer  to  the  priests  being  bowed  down  by  the  weight. 

Legrain,  G. —  Oil  fut  Thebes-oiiasit  ?  This  paper  shows  that  uast  was 
Karnak  rather  than  Qurneh.  The  temple  of  Qurneh  is  stated  to  be  built  on  the 
west  of  uast  (J>er  anient  uast),  to  see  the  beauties  of  uast,  looking  across  the  river 
to  Karnak. 

Legrain,  G. — Fragment  de  texte  titre  nouveau.  This  reads  :  "  Over  the 
workers  {ubS)  in  the  lake  north  of  Amen."  It  is  supposed  that  this  refers  to  a 
pond  north  of  Karnak.  What  the  workers  did  there — irrigating,  water-carrying, 
leather-curing,  brickmaking — is  unknown. 

Daressv,  G. —  Une  Ste/e  du  dieu  Ched.  The  familiar  figure  of  Horus  protector 
standing  on  crocodiles,  is  sometimes  specialised  under  the  name  of  Shed,  the 
saviour.  Here  is  published  a  stele  showing  "Shed  the  great  god"  standing,  holding 
a  scorpion  in  the  right  hand,  and  in  the  left  a  shield,  spear,  and  two  serpents.  He 
is  adored  by  Pa-her-pedt,  his  son  Amenmes,  and  wife  Nubarset ;  these  family 
names  prove  that  he  is  the  same  as  is  named  on  a  coffin  in  the  royal  group  of 
Deir  el-Bahri. 

Daressy,  G. — Les  Parents  de  Clu'cluinq  /"■.  A  stele  shows  the  great  chief 
of  the  foreigners,  Sheshenq,  adoring  Osiris,  son  of  the  great  chief  of  the  foreigners, 
Nemart ;  his  mother,  daughter  of  the  great  chief  of  the  foreigners,  Thentspeh. 
This  is  taken  as  referring  to  Sheshenq  I,  and  agreeing  with  the  prevalent  misreading 
of  Horpasen's  genealogy.  All  it  shows  is  that  Nemart  and  Thentspeh,  the  daughter 
of  Usarkon  II,  had  a  son  Sheshenq,  who  succeeded  to  his  father's  titles.  This 
does  not  represent  a  king,  but  a  subject. 

Daressv,  G. —  Un  Scarab^e  d'Amenhetep  IV. — This  describes  a  big  scarab, 
like  the  historical  ones  of  Amenhetep  III,  giving  the  cartouche  of  the  living  Aten 
and  titles  of  Nefer-kheper-ra  ua-ne-ra,  living  in  truth,  Amenhetep,  divine  prince  of 
Thebes,  and  the  royal  wife  Nefertythi.     The  cartouches  of  the  king  are  also,  one 

I 


130  Annates  du  Service. 

on  either  side,  under  the  legs.  The  continuance  of  the  fashion  of  big  scarabs  into 
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Amenhetep  IV  is  already  known  from  that  in 
Scarabs,  XXXVI,  i. 

Carter,  Howard. — A  Tomb  prepared  for  Queen  Hatshepsuit.  The  greatest 
discoveries  at  Thebes  are  those  due  to  the  ever-searching  eyes  of  the  natives  :  the 
royal  mummies  of  Deir  el-Bahri,  the  tomb  of  Amenhetep  II  and  its  hoard,  the 
tomb  of  the  priests  of  Amen,  and  now  an  entirely  new  type  of  royal  tomb  in  a 
most  unsuspected  position.  Far  back  in  the  valleys  behind  the  Tombs  of  the 
Kings  are  now  found  tombs  high  up  in  the  cliffs,  belonging,  probably,  to  the 
queens  of  the  early  XVI II Ith  dynasty.  Notice  was  first  called  to  the  doings  of 
the  natives  by  a  large  find  of  jewellery  appearing  in  the  market.  Then  it  was 
traced  to  the  new  region,  and  now  Mr.  Carter  has  cleared  out  one  tomb,  and  found 
in  it  a  sarcophagus  for  Hatshepsut.  High  up  on  the  cliff  face,  over  200  feet  above 
the  valley,  was  a  cleft  in  the  rock,  hidden  by  a  rise  in  front  As  the  cliff  is 
360  feet  high,  it  is  hardly  more  accessible  from  above  than  from  below.  The 
Arabs  reached  the  place  by  creeping  down  a  cleft  until  they  reached  a  ledge  of 
rock,  and  then  lowering  themselves  down  by  a  rope  into  the  cleft  of  the  tomb. 
In  the  base  of  the  cleft  was  cut  a  flight  of  five  steps,  leading  to  a  passage,  this 
turned  to  the  right  and  led  into  a  chamber,  and  there,  standing  askew,  was  the 
sarcophagus  of  yellow  crystalline  sandstone,  much  like  that  in  red  sandstone,  which 
was  the  actual  tomb  of  the  queen  found  in  the  Biban  el-Meluk.  On  this  sarco- 
phagus she  is  called  the  great  heiress,  princess  of  all  lands,  royal  daughter,  royal 
sister,  divine  wife,  royal  wife;  this  shows  that  it  was  made  during  the  reign  of 
Tehutmes  II.  The  tomb  was  evidently  unfinished,  and  had  been  abandoned  when 
the  queen  took  the  throne,  and  determined  to  be  buried  among  the  kings.  The 
whole  passages  and  chambers  were  filled  with  rubbish  and  earth  washed  in  and 
hardened.  The  Arabs  had  run  a  burrow  60  feet  in,  but  not  to  the  chamber;  the 
complete  clearance,  however,  yielded  nothing  but  the  sarcophagus.  How  the 
Egyptians  raised  the  sarcophagus,  weighing  much  over  a  ton,  up  200  feet  of  cliff, 
and  then  turned  it  in  down  the  passage,  is  quite  beyond  all  that  we  have  seen  of 
their  engineering.  No  one  better  than  Mr.  Carter  could  be  engaged  on  this  new 
field,  and  we  hope  to  hear  much  more  of  his  results  in  future. 

Ahmed  Bey  Kamal. — Quelques  jours  de  fouillcs  a  Dimeh  es-Sebaa.  A  brief 
account  of  this  much  plundered  place,  with  a  list  of  objects  removed  in  the  digging 
of  Sayed  Bey  Kashaba. 

Naville,  Ed. — La  plante  de  Horbeit.  This  plant  is  the  flower  on  the  head 
of  Nefertum,  which  resembles  the  lotus.  It  is  mentioned  in  a  text  which  occurs 
on  a  fragment  of  Xlth  or  Xllth  dynasty  sarcophagus  at  Horbeit,  in  the  south  hall 
of  offerings  at  Deir  el-Bahri,  Chapter  178  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  in  the  XXVIth 
dynasty  tomb  of  Aba,  and  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  tomb  of  Puamra.  The  name 
of  it  is  "  the  sennu  which  comes  forth  from  Nut  "  (Puamra) ;  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers 
is  mentioned,  "  the  plant  named  sennut  grows  on  its  bulb  as  the  kartu,  it  has  a 
flower  like  a  lotus."     It  is  not  identified. 

Nefertum  is  often  called  Mahes,  "  the  terrible  lion." 

DaressY,  G. — La  mcropole  des  Grands  Pretres  d'Heliopolis  sous  I'ancien  Empire. 
Along  the  eastern  wall  of  the  great  temenos  of  Heliopolis  have  been  found  four 


Annales  du  Service.  131 

large  tombs  of  the  high  priests  of  the  Vlth  dynasty.  They  were  named  Meru, 
Sebeky,  Sebeky  By,  and  Khuneher  (Glory  of  Horus).  These  were  built  of  limestone, 
closely  enclosing  the  sarcophagus,  with  a  space  of  rather  over  half  the  sarcophagus 
length  at  the  entrance.  All  of  the  burials  had  been  completely  plundered  ;  there 
only  remained,  of  Meru  fragments  of  two  alabaster  vases,  and  of  Sebeky  the  same, 
and  six  model  chisels  of  copper.  From  Sebeky  By  there  were  many  models, 
25  axes,  4  round-head  axes,  26  round-head  adzes,  12  square-head  adzes,  10  double- 
edged  knives,  jj  single-edged  knives ;  and  of  alabaster  9  necked  vases,  2  splayed 
vases,  and  seven  saucers. 

Each  chamber  is  inscribed  with  titles  and  name  on  each  side,  and  with  long 
rows  of  offerings,  similar  to  the  interior  of  the  finest  wooden  coffins  of  the 
Xllth  dynasty,  such  as  Riqqeh,  XXXIII.  It  is  evident  that  this  style  of  coffin  is 
descended  from  the  small  tomb  chamber  of  the  Old  Kingdom.  The  first  two  tombs 
had  a  basalt  table  of  offerings  in  each.  In  the  first  three  tombs  the  sarcophagus 
had  a  band  of  inscription  on  each  side.  All  of  the  tombs  have  been  removed  to 
the  Cairo  Museum,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  they  will  be  published  in  facsimile, 
drawing  or  photograph,  as  printed  type  is  inaccurate  for  the  detail,  and  entirely 
useless  for  the  style. 

During  the  excavation  of  these  tombs  minor  objects  were  found ;  naturally 
at  Heliopolis  obelisks  are  usual,  four  occurring,  with  names  compounded  with 
Pepy  and  Meryra,  showing  the  period. 

DarESSY,  G. —  Une  Inscription  cCAchmoun  (Delta).  This  is  on  a  slab  of  basalt 
which  originally  was  prepared  for  annals  of  the  XVII Ith  or  XlXth  dynasty, 
having  a  mention  of  Tunep.  This  was  reversed,  and  in  the  XXXth  dynasty  a  long 
ritual  text  was  engraved.  Lastly,  it  has  been  used  as  a  millstone,  like  most  of  the 
hard  stones  of  the  Delta.  First  is  set  out  in  lists  all  the  materials  needed  for  a 
ceremony,  then  follows  directions  to  the  her-seshta,  showing  that  this  was  a  priestly 
title  ;  then  the  speech  of  the  seq-hdt ;  then,  further  directions  for  the  hensek,  seq-hdt 
and  her-seshta,  a  lamentation  and  further  speech  to  the  goddess  Nubt,  whose  service 
is  described.  M.  Daressy  discusses  the  varieties  of  kohl  named,  and  other  words. 
For  Kliesyt  is  proposed  the  fruit  of  Cassia  fistula.  It  is  concluded  that  this  stone 
had  been  brought  from  Tell  Abu  Billeh  (Terenutis)  in  the  nome  Amu,  and  various 
place-names  which  occur  are  discussed  to  identify  them  with  known  sites,  ending 
with  a  list  of  twenty-five  identifications  and  a  map  of  the  nome.  This  text  is, 
therefore,  of  much  value  for  geography. 

MUNIER,  Henri. —  Un  passage  nouveau  du  Martyre  de  Saint  Philotheos. 
Some  fragments  were  already  known  about  this  Saint  who  was  martyred  at 
Antioch  in  the  Diocletian  persecution.  Part  of  the  martyrology,  with  some  wild 
miracles,  occurs  on  three  leaves  in  the  Mus^e  Borgia,  here  published  and  translated. 

MUNIER,  Henri. — La  Stele  fune'raire  du  moine  Mtna.  This  tombstone, 
dated  in  869  A.D.,  is  notable  as  giving  the  name  of  Babylon  surviving  then,  and 
not  yet  displaced  by  an  Arab  name. 

Daressy,  G. — Fragment  de  statue  du  Prince  Khd-m-uas.  This  statue  was  at 
Sheykh  Embarek,  and  is  only  of  interest  as  naming  two  local  Hathors,  of  Cusae 
and  of  Roant,  the  latter  probably  a  place  by  the  valley  of  Speos  Artemidos, 

I  2 


132  Annates  du  Service. 

Daressy,  G. — Le  Mastaba  de  Khd-f-Khoufou  d  Gizeh.  This  has  been  partly 
published  in  Mariette's  Mastabas,  and  by  de  Rouge  and  Gauthier.  The  texts  are 
here  given  in  type,  but  for  a  tomb  of  this  importance  there  should  be  a  facsimile 
publication.  The  tomb  has  been  anciently  altered  by  vaulting  over  the  court  and 
making  it  into  a  storehouse. 

Daressy,  G. — Statue  de  Georges,  Prince  de  Tentyris.  This  figure  was  found 
in  the  sebakh  at  Dendereh.  It  is  of  black  granite,  3^  feet  high,  of  the  Late 
Ptolemaic  period.  The  name  George  is  known  in  classical  times,  though  rare. 
He  was  a  high  civil  official,  hereditary  chief,  and  also  prophet  of  Isis  and  of  Hathor, 
the  head  of  all  authority  in  Tentyris.  From  this  and  another  statue  is  gleaned 
the  genealogy  of  these  princes  of  Tentyris,  apparently  Pa-khred-bast,  Pennut, 
Pakhred-ka,  named  Ptolemy,  and  Quuarkes  or  Georgios. 


\ 


(     '33     ) 


REVIEWS. 


The  New  Archaeological  Discoveries  and  tlieir  Bearing  on  the  New  Testament 
and  upon  the  Life  and  Times  of  tlu  Primitive  Church. — CAMDEN  M.  COBERN,  D.D. 
8vo.     698  pp.,  37  pis.     (Funk  &  Wagnalls.)     3.CX)  dollars.     1917. 

This  is  a  book  that  was  much  wanted,  to  focus  together  the  varied  material, 
especially  papyri,  that  bore  on  Early  Christianity.  The  work  has  been  done  with 
the  responsibility  of  selection,  but  letting  each  writer  quoted  speak  for  himself  in 
copious  extracts.  Everyone  who  is  not  already  a  specialist  in  these  studies  will  be 
much  indebted  to  Dr.  Cobern,  and  the  work  ought  to  have  a  very  wide  circulation. 
The  only  matter  which  seems  to  require  fuller  treatment  in  proportion  is  the  present 
state  of  catacomb  research,  and  a  report  on  that,  free  from  the  theological  pre- 
occupation which  seems  to  colour  recent  accounts,  would  be  very  welcome. 

The  work  is  divided  in  exactly  equal  halves,  on  the  papyri  and  on  the  monu- 
ments. The  qualities  and  nature  of  papyrus,  the  principal  papyri  known,  and  the 
general  character  of  the  great  finds  of  papyri  in  the  Fayum  and  elsewhere,  begin 
the  work.  Next  is  Deissmann's  new  view  that  the  New  Testament  Greek  is  the 
Hellenistic  vernacular  of  the  time,  the  same  popular  language  seen  in  the 
innumerable  letters  and  documents  of  the  first  century;  also  examples  of  papyri 
bearing  on  the  ideas  of  the  people.  Then  an  account  of  the  Fayum,  and  the 
condition  of  the  towns  anciently.  This  serves  as  an  introduction  to  the  whole 
subject.  We  would  only  amend  one  passage  where  the  burnt  papyri  of  Thmuis, 
which  were  so  sadly  ruined  in  excavation,  are  referred  to  with  the  remark  that  "  it 
has  just  been  discovered  that  even  these  burned  papyri  can  be  read."  It  should  be 
remembered  that  ten  years  earlier  the  burnt  papyri  of  Tanis  were  recovered  without 
any  loss,  and  two  long  and  important  ones  read  and  published.  This  success 
should  have  prevented  the  failure  to  manage  the  Thmuis  find. 

The  next  division  of  the  book  deals  with  the  New  Testament,  its  origin  and 
textual  form,  grammar,  style,  and  vocabulary,  from  the  contemporary  point  of  view, 
giving  an  active  view  of  the  general  results.  Next  is  an  account  of  the  great 
codices  and  the  many  fragments  of  gospels  and  epistles  older  than  the  great 
codices ;  this  shows  the  very  important  evidence  that  they  give  as  to  the  identity 
of  the  codices  with  the  pre-Constantine  text.  The  great  interest  of  the  Syriac, 
Coptic,  and  other  versions  is  described,  and  their  bearing  on  the  early  text. 

The  collateral  documents  are  described  at  length,  apocryphal,  apologetic,  and 
liturgical.  To  some,  this  may  be  the  more  attractive  part  of  the  work,  as  giving  an 
insight  on  the  tone  and  ideas  of  early  Christianity,  as  to  how  the  canonical  writings 
were  fitted  into  the  mental  frame  of  the  Greek  world  with  its  teeming  ideas  and 
beliefs.  The  Logia  papyri  are  quoted  and  discussed.  A  description  and  extracts 
are  given  of  the  Gospel  of  Peter,  written  shortly  before  or  after  the  close  of  the 
first  century ;  of  the  Revelation  of  Peter ;  the  fragments  of  lost  gospels  from 
Oxyrhynchos ;  the  Apocalypse  of  Baruch ;  the  Acts  of  Paul,  of  which  the  Paul 

I  3 


1 34  Reviews. 

and  Thekla  forms  a  part,  probably  of  the  first  century ;  the  Conflict  of  Severus,  and 
various  other  apocrypha.  Of  other  writings  there  are  discussed  the  Apology  of 
Aristides,  the  Shepherd  of  Hernias,  the  Ring  of  Pope  Xystus,  the  Apostolic 
Teaching  of  Irenaeus,  Origen  on  the  Book  of  Revelation,  the  Letters  of  Ignatius, 
and  the  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles.  Nearly  all  these,  be  it  remembered, 
were  unknown  forty  years  ago,  beyond  their  mere  names.  It  is  evident  that  we 
must  take  a  far  more  living  and  substantial  view  of  the  first  two  centuries  than  our 
fathers  did,  who  regarded  the  New  Testament  as  something  floating  in  air,  detached 
from  all  history  of  its  surrounding  ideas. 

The  Libelli,  or  certificates  of  paganism  issued  during  the  persecutions,  are 
next  quoted.  There  is  no  proof  that  any  of  these  were  given  to  Christians,  they 
may  be  merely  vouchers  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  authorities,  like  that  given  to  the 
priestesses  of  the  Crocodile-god.  Some  of  the  Sermons,  Prayers,  Amulets,  and 
Hymns  are  then  described  ;  among  them  is  seen  strongly  mystical  feeling,  especialh- 
in  the  Odes,  bordering  on  Persian  imagery.  Early  Christian  letters  and  martyr- 
ologies  close  the  division  on  manuscripts. 

The  monumental  section  opens  with  an  outline  of  the  excavations  in  Palestine 
of  the  Hellenistic  Age.  The  Pompeian  life  is  described,  and  a  general  account 
of  the  Catacombs.  What  is  particularly  needed  is  a  recital  of  all  that  can  be 
attributed  to  the  first,  to  the  second,  and  to  the  third  centuries,  and  the  conclusions 
as  to  the  growth  of  beliefs  and  customs  which  could  be  drawn  from  the  paintings 
in  each  century.  The  cemeteries  of  Antinoe  and  Akhmim  are  also  noticed. 
Ramsay's  results  from  Phrygia  and  its  early  Christianity  are  well  described,  and 
also  an  outline  of  the  Dalmatian  excavations.  The  great  mass  of  Early  Christian 
stone  buildings  in  Syria  are  illustrated  from  the  American  expedition.  The 
account  of  the  excavations  at  Ephesus  is  from  Hogarth's  great  discoveries  onward 
to  Roman  times,  and  the  results  at  Athens,  Corinth,  and  Rome  are  also  fully 
outlined.  The  Galatian  cities  also  receive  notice,  beside  Tarsus  and  the  Syrian 
cities. 

The  conclusion  is  a  summing  up  on  the  literary  habits,  the  ways  of  life,  the 
later  Jewish  literature,  and  various  matters  of  interest  of  the  early  centuries.  To 
some  extent  the  origin  of  the  work  in  lectures  is  apparent  in  the  style,  and  some 
tracking  back  on  to  previous  lines  in  later  parts.  A  book  strictly  written  as  such 
would  be  more  crystallized.  Yet  this  is  what  will  attract  many  readers,  and 
prevent  one  view  of  a  matter  shutting  out  collateral  interests.  As  a  whole  the 
work  is  well  organized  and  clearly  expressed ;  and  we  have  given  an  outline  of  it 
to  show  what  a  wide  field  of  information  is  now  available,  and  how  much  should 
be  generally  known  by  all  those  concerned  in  the  history  of  Christianity. 

The  Inscriptions  of  Smai. — Alan  H.  Gardinek  and  T.  ERIC  Peet.  folio, 
'7f  ><  I3i-     Parti.     19  pp,  86  plates.     35J.     1917.     (Egypt  Exploration  Fund.) 

In  1905  the  expedition  to  Sinai  copied  all  the  Egyptian  inscriptions  that  were 
then  remaining,  and  the  plates  of  them  were  in  preparation.  After  many  were 
arranged,  differences  arose  between  the  decisions  of  the  Committee  and  the  orders 
given  for  the  publication,  progress  could  not  be  made,  and  the  material  was  left  in 
the  Fund  Office.  Now  after  twelve  years  it  appears  in  the  present  volume.  The 
interval  has  given  time  for  Mr.  Peet  to  take  up  the  subject,  to  search  and  compare 
the  previous  material  of  squeezes,  photographs,  and  publications,  and  so  to  improve 
in  some  cases  on  the  full-sized  copies  made  on  the  spot.  A  single  copyist  can 
hardly  make   a  definitive  copy  of  a  much-injured  inscription,  and  the  difficulty 


1 


Reviews.  135 

of  often  working  in  a  gale,  which  would  tear  paper  if  left  loose,  made  copying  the 
less  certain.  The  total  result  is  that  of  the  published  copies  309  are  from  the 
expedition  of  Prof.  Petrie,  29  from  squeezes,  and  about  a  dozen  from  photographs 
and  publication*.  The  expedition  copies  are  the  sole  authority  in  most  cases, 
but  they  have  been  checked  by  squeezes  in  24  instances,  by  photographs  in  62, 
and  by  the  originals  brought  to  England  in  36  instances.  This  will  give  an  idea 
of  the  sources  of  the  present  edition.  It  is  unfortunate  that  no  reference  has 
been  made  to  the  copyists,  to  indicate  who  made  the  various  copies.  Their 
experience  differed  greatly,  two  were  completely  accustomed  to  such  work,  one  had 
slight  practice,  and  two  knew  nothing  of  hieroglyphs  and  had  never  copied  before. 
Though  all  their  copies  were  checked  over,  they  were  yet  of  varying  precision.  In 
one  respect  the  arrangement  of  the  plates  is  unfortunate.  No  attempt  has  been 
made  to  keep  the  copies  to  the  same  scale  of  reduction.  This  entirely  prevents  the 
relative  size  of  the  originals  being  apparent ;  it  destroys  the  artistic  sense  of  their 
relation,  and  confounds  delicate  work  with  large  work.  It  is  a  system  which 
ignores  everything  but  philology.  There  would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  main- 
taining a  uniform  scale,  as  on  PI.  XXXIV  some  of  the  largest  and  smallest 
inscriptions,  side  by  side  on  one  block,  are  to  one  scale.  Parts  of  the  same  scene 
are  even  issued  on  different  scales,  as  125  {a)  and  [p),  see  Researches  in  Sinai,  Fig.  98. 
There  seems  no  reason  for  publishing  coarser  copies  of  the  plans,  which  were 
issued  in  Researches  in  Sinai  in  fine  outline.  Originally  published  to  decimal 
scales,  they  are  now  all  irregular.  One  mis-statement  on  p.  5  should  be  noted : 
"  The  term  '  free-standing  .stele '  has  been  chosen,  for  want  of  a  better  phrase,  in 
order  to  indicate  the  large  stelae,  usually  inscribed  on  all  four  sides,  that  are 
found  in  the  Approach  to  the  Temple  and  elsewhere ;  Prof  Petrie  has  called 
these  Bethels."  This  is  by  no  means  the  case,  as  can  be  seen  in  Researches  in 
Sinai,  p.  (>"],  where  the  small  shelters  on  the  hill-side  are  described,  and  it  is 
suggested  that  these — with,  in  some  cases,  small  private  steles  placed  in  them — 
were  sleeping  places  for  worshippers.  These  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  great 
steles  leading  into  the  temple  site,  inscribed  on  all  sides,  which  are  purely  royal. 
It  is  unfortunate  that  Serabi't  is  always  mis-spelled  Serabit ;  no  one  who  has  heard 
the  word  from  the  mouths  of  the  natives  could  lengthen  the  a  ;  it  is  almost  inaudible, 
as  shown  by  the  name  being  often  written  as  Sarbut.  The  long  a  will  tend  to 
enforce  the  common  error  of  speaking  of  Serabit. 

For  the  first  time  we  have  now  an  almost  complete  view  of  the  Egyptian 
inscriptions  in  Sinai,  and  we  must  fully  recognize  the  additional  work  which 
Mr.  Peat  has  given  to  the  fitting  together  of  all  the  different  sources  of  material,  as 
additional  to  the  main  stock  of  the  copies  of  the  Fund  expedition.  Dr.  Gardiner's 
special  province  remains  in  the  translation  of  all  the  inscriptions,  which  is  to  appear 
as  Part  II. 

Scarabs  and  Cylinders  with  Navies.  W.  M.  FLINDERS  PETRIE.  4to.  102  pp., 
74  plates.     30J.     1917.     (British  School  in  Egypt.) 

Scarabs  have  always  been  a  favourite  subject  for  collectors,  as  being  small, 
interesting,  and  often  beautiful.  In  these  respects,  as  well  as  in  historic  interest 
and  value,  they  are  in  Egyptian  archaeology  what  coins  are  in  the  Greek  and 
Roman  world.  The  scarabs  with  names  of  kings  and  of  private  persons  are  by  far 
the  most  important,  and  are  the  more  eagerly  collected.  The  bane  of  most 
collections  is  the  profusion  made  under  Tehutmes  III,  which  are  to  the  rest  of  the 
series  what   the  Athenian  tetradrachm   is  in  Greek  coinage,  or  the  Constantine 

I  4 


1 30  Reviews. 

family  in  the  Roman  series.  Hence  to  consider  the  historic  value  we  must 
disregard  the  excess  of  this  reign.  Of  all  other  named  scarabs  the  present  position 
is  that  about  a  third  are  at  University  College  and  here  published,  a  third  are  in 
the  British  Museum,  and  a  third  in  other  collections.  The  present  catalogue, 
therefore,  gives  as  large  a  number  as  can  be  anywhere  compared  together;  and  as 
regarding  variety,  it  is  by  far  the  most  comprehensive,  having  240  different  royal 
personages  and  over  300  private,  as  against  150  and  100  respectively  in  the  British 
Museum.  There  is  then  here  the  best  opportunity  for  exact  study,  and  solving  the 
various  questions  that  have  arisen  in  the  subject.  Beside  this  the  published 
catalogues  of  the  British  Museum  and  Cairo,  and  of  lesser  collections,  have  been 
fully  used  in  the  text.  In  order  to  make  the  series  as  complete  as  possible  for 
reference,  beside  the  240  royal  persons  represented,  there  are  drawings  of  objects 
of  54  others,  only  known  as  unique  examples  elsewhere.  Before  the  scarabs  there 
is  given  the  .series  of  early  cylinders  of  the  pre-  and  proto-dynastic  times,  so  far  as 
they  can  be  collected  from  all  sources.  Of  these,  ^t,  are  at  University  College,  out 
of  a  total  of  174.  All  of  the  name-scarabs  and  cylinders  at  the  College  are  issued 
here  in  full-size  photograph,  in  plates  facing  the  detailed  transcription  and 
catalogue.  The  forms  of  the  backs  of  the  scarabs  are  given  in  15  plates  of 
drawings,  with  the  date  reference  to  each.  Indexes  are  given  of  the  names  and 
titles. 

F"rom  this  apparatus  some  of  the  results  are  here  discussed.  In  the  first  place 
the  frontispiece  shows  the  source  of  different  forms  of  scarab  backs  in  five  different 
genera,  only  one  of  which — scarabaetis — has  been  hitherto  recognised.  This 
biological  distinction  must  be  the  basis  of  any  classification  of  the  forms.  The 
marking  of  the  wing-cases  on  the  backs  is  found  to  belong  to  Upper  Egypt,  and  the 
smooth  backs  to  the  Delta.  The  purpose  with  which  scarabs  were  made  appears, 
from  various  indications  and  references  to  them,  to  be  distinctly  as  amulets ;  it  was 
only  during  the  Middle  Kingdom  that  they  were  at  all  usual  as  seals,  and  the 
conditions  in  other  periods  show  that  such  use  was  not  their  purpose. 

The  materials  and  mode  of  engraving  are  detailed.  It  appears  that  the  point 
engraving  was  the  earliest,  and  lasted  on  hard  stones  down  to  the  XlVth  dynasty; 
while  the  wheel  engraving  begins  in  the  Xlth  dynasty,  and  is  the  sole  method  in 
the  XVIIIth  and  later  times  on  hard  stones.  Of  course  the  soft  steatite  base  for 
glazed  scarabs  was  cut  with  the  point  in  all  ages. 

A  favourite  assertion  of  most  writers  on  the  subject  is  that  scarabs  of  various 
kings  were  frequently  made  in  subsequent  times,  leading  to  the  further  assertion 
that  no  scarabs  were  made  before  the  Xllth  dynasty.  This  fundamental  question 
is  fully  discussed  here,  on  a  much  larger  basis  than  before.  Firstly,  the  adoption 
of  the  names  of  earlier  by  later  kings  is  demonstrated.  The  name  of  Tehutmes  III, 
Men-kheper-ra,  was  adopted  by  the  Theban  ruler  of  the  XXIst  dynasty,  by 
Khmeny,  and  by  Nekau  I,  as  shown  by  independent  monuments.  These  later 
kings  will  account  for  nearly  all  the  Menkheperra  scarabs  that  are  later  than 
Tehutmes  III.  Similarly,  the  name  of  User-maot-ra  (Ramessu  II)  was  taken  by 
eight  kings ;  and  there  are  eight  other  royal  names  which  were  re-appropriated  a 
second  or  third  time.  It  is  therefore  only  in  very  exceptional  cases  that  a  king's 
name  was  placed  on  a  scarab  beyond  his  immediate  reign.  This  at  once  removes 
the  suppo.sed  ground  for  post-dating  all  the  early  scarabs,  and  we  can  only  argue 
back  step  by  step  before  the  Xllth  dynasty,  as  to  whether  each  class  found  is 
consistent  with  an  early  or  a  late  date.  The  only  material  for  settling  the  question 
is  that  of  the  well-dated  royal  scarabs  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  and  onward.     From 


Reviews.  i  ■z^'j 

these  it  is  seen  that  fine  circular  spiral  patterns,  and  hard-stone  scarabs  engraved, 
are  unknown  after  the  middle  of  the  Xllth  dynasty  until  a  few  examples  appear  in 
the  full  XVIIIth  dynasty.  If  no  such  scarabs  exist  that  are  dated,  it  is  clear  that 
undated  examples  cannot  be  assigned  to  the  Xlllth-XVIJth  dynasties.  Thus  we 
must  assign  such  undated  scarabs  to  before  the  Xllth  dynasty.  In  particular,  a 
class  of  small  hard-stone  scarabs  with  roughly-cut  names  must  then  be  placed 
about  the  Xth  dynasty.  On  such  is  the  epithet  Uah-ka-nefer  which  agrees  with 
the  name  Uah-ka  of  that  age,  and  the  names  which  accompany  this  epithet  belong 
to  the  Vlth  to  Xlth  dynasties  on  other  monuments.  Having  a  secure  anchorage 
in  the  Xth  dynasty  or  earlier,  we  see  no  reason  to  question  the  few  scarabs  which 
bear  names  of  the  Vllth-IXth  dynasties,  a  period  so  obscure  that  we  cannot 
suppose  anyone  copying  it  later.  The  IVth-Vlth  dynasties  have  scarabs  unlike 
any  made  in  later  times.  As  far  back  as  Sneferu,  at  the  close  of  the  llird  dynasty, 
an  inversion  of  writing  is  seen  on  both  his  scarabs,  S-nefer-r-f,  inverting  the 
supplementary  letters  of  nefer.  This  inversion  is  found  on  two  contemporary 
monuments,  the  tomb  of  Sneferu-Khof,  and  a  lid  in  the  Cairo  Museum,  but  it 
never  occurs  later.  The  earliest  scarab  which  has  signs  of  being  contemporary 
with  a  king  is  that  of  Neb-ka-ra,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ilird  dynasty,  for  the 
style  of  it  differs  from  any  made  after  the  1  Vth  dynasty.  The  early  date  of  scarabs 
back  to  the  llird  dynasty  seems  then  to  be  confirmed  by  all  the  evidence. 

A  very  uncertain  point  hitherto  has  been  the  attribution  of  scarabs  with  the 
name  User-maot-ra  among  the  nine  kings  who  bore  that  name.  This  is  pretty 
well  cleared  up  by  collecting  the  arrangement  of  the  signs  on  all  certain  monuments 
(p.  29),  and  finding  some  definite  criteria  to  distinguish  the  reigns.  The  late 
rulers  of  the  Dodecarchy  are  treated  more  historically  than  hitherto ;  Menkaura 
has  come  into  his  place  in  the  XXVth  dynasty,  guaranteed  by  a  Book  of  the  Dead 
written  for  a  son  of  his. 

Proceedings  of  the  Numismatic  and  Antiquarian  Society  of  Philadelphia. 
Vol.  27.     1916. 

Among  several  interesting  papers  here,  one  on  "  The  Transcontinental  Silk 
Trade  at  the  Christian  Era,"  by  Wilfred  H.  SchofT,  touches  on  Egyptian  matters, 
and  is  an  important  study.  A  map  of  the  routes,  and  fifty-two  figures  of  the 
Bactrian  gold  coinage,  add  to  the  value. 

The  two  main  routes  from  China  to  the  Mediterranean  were  (i)  the  land  route 
across  the  Centra!  Asian  deserts  and  Persia  to  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf, 
thence  across  Arabia  to  Petra  and  Antioch,  or  down  the  Persian  Gulf  and  round 
Arabia,  up  the  Red  Sea  to  Alexandria.  The  other  route  was  (2)  striking  off  the 
deserts  to  Taxila  in  the  Punjab,  down  to  Baroda,  and  thence  by  sea  up  to 
Alexandria.  A  variant  of  this  was  to  embark  near  Karachi,  coast  round  Arabia, 
up  the  Red  Sea,  and  by  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  to  Petra,  and  so  up  Syria  to  Antioch. 
This  was  the  Nabathaean  route.  The  importance  of  Koptos,  instead  of  Suez,  as 
the  port  of  Egypt,  is  due  to  the  north  winds  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  coral  reefs 
which  prevent  tacking  against  the  wind.  In  the  narrower  regions,  therefore, 
shipping  was  so  slow  that  it  was  better  to  land  at  Berenice,  Philotera,  Myos  Hormos, 
or  one  of  the  other  ports,  and  camel  the  goods  across  to  the  Nile.  Hence  came 
the  importance  of  Alexandria  rather  than  Suez  or  Pelusium. 

The  principal  matters  explained  in  this  paper  are  the  commercial  relations  of 
the  time,  which  largely  involved  the  trade  conditions  of  Egypt.  Silk  was  known 
in  China  by  the  twenty-seventh  century  B.C.,  and  had  passed  into  India  by  the 


138  Reviews. 

eleventh  century.  Probably  owing  to  Alexander's  eastern  conquests,  the  Indian 
goods  became  known  in  the  West,  and  silk  reached  Syria  under  the  Seleucidae. 
There  was  still  much  confusion  in  Roman  times  between  cotton  and  silk.  The 
cotton  came  from  trees,  and  the  silkworms  were  fed  on  trees,  hence,  in  third-hand 
accounts,  they  seemed  much  alike  in  origin. 

The  great  development  of  China  in  foreign  trade  was  part  of  the  growth 
shown  by  their  building  the  great  wall  to  block  out  the  Mongolian  hordes  and 
give  clear  access  to  Turkestan  for  the  western  trade.  This  was  in  200  B.C.  probably 
due  to  the  establishment  of  the  Graeco-Bactrian  kingdom  in  touch  with  the  West. 
The  Mediterranean  was  still  too  confused  then  to  give  free  scope  for  trade.  Not 
till  the  firm  establishment  of  the  Augustan  peace  from  Britain  to  Baghdad — or 
rather  Ctesiphon — and  the  suppression  of  piracy,  was  the  west  ready  for  the 
unlimited  import  of  luxuries.  Hippalus  for  the  first  time  revealed  the  trade 
monsoon  to  the  West — the  easy  navigation  in  opposite  directions  at  different  times 
of  the  year.  Roman  shipping  grew  immensely.  Strabo,  26  B.C.,  says  that  formerly 
not  twenty  ships  traded  in  the  Arabian  Gulf,  but  that  now  a  hundred  and  twenty 
left  Myos  Hormos  for  India  (II,  v,  12).  The  trade  was,  however,  one-sided  ;  the 
Chinese  market  needed  but  little  from  the  West,  consequently  the  imported  silk 
had  to  be  paid  for  in  gold.  Rome  had  accumulated  great  stores  of  gold  by  the 
Greek  plunder  of  Persia  and  all  the  earlier  civilisations.  This  overflowed  in  the 
rage  for  gilding  in  the  time  of  Nero  and  his  "  Golden  House  " ;  and  this  gold  was 
the  exchange  for  the  imported  silk.  Much  of  this  wealth  was  detained  by  the 
way  in  transit  dues  of  the  Parthian  empire ;  and  it  was  this  wealth,  foolishly  given 
up  by  Rome,  that  armed  the  East  against  the  Empire,  and  so  helped  its  destruction. 
As  much  as  four  million  pounds  a  year  was  being  thus  transferred. 

Looking  next  to  the  eastern  side,  the  terminus  of  the  trade  route  was  at 
Singanfu,  which  explains  the  importance  of  this  place  so  far  inland,  and  the 
presence  of  the  Syrian  Christian  mission  there.  It  is  the  first  place  clear  of  the 
desert  and  the  mountains,  whence  roads  lead  in  all  directions  to  the  fertile 
regions  and  coast  of  China.  The  Chinese  were  by  no  means  content  to  let  every- 
thing pass  through  intermediaries.  They  despatched  one  Kan  Ying  to  follow  the 
trade  route,  and  try  to  open  direct  trade  with  the  Roman  consumer.  He  succeeded 
in  reaching  the  Euphrates  and  tried  to  go  forward  from  the  Persian  Gulf  The 
traders,  through  whom  alone  he  could  gather  information,  did  their  best  to  scare 
him  with  stories  of  tigers  and  lions  by  land,  and  a  terrible  salt  sea  which  might 
take  two  years  to  cross.  Thus  the  Nabathaean  and  Egyptian  traders  succeeded 
in  keeping  the  business  in  their  own  hands. 

Not  only  was  the  silk  trade  from  China,  but  the  Coans  and  Syrians  learned 
how  to  reduce  the  heavy  China  silks  to  thin  gauze.  This  cannot  have  been  by 
"  splitting,"  as  is  said  ;  they  must  have  unravelled  the  stuff,  respun  the  thread  verj- 
fine,  and  used  it  to  weave  the  gauze.  This  fresh  stuff  had  some  return  sale  to 
China,  not  only  for  its  fineness,  but  from  the  attraction  of  its  dyes.  The  importance 
of  the  Turkish  kingdom  of  the  Tochari  was  due  to  their  being  necessary  inter- 
mediaries in  the  land  transport ;  they  held  the  former  Greek  kingdom  of  Bactria. 
and  their  first  great  king,  Kanishka,  is  well  known  by  his  abundant  coinage.  His 
Buddhist  council  of  58  B.C.  started  the  era  still  used  in  India.  His  gold  coinage  is 
very  varied,  with  figures  of  Mithra,  Nana,  and  other  Indian  gods,  and  even  of 
Serapis,  showing  the  strong  Alexandrian  connection.  This  coinage  is  exactly  on 
the  standard  of  the  aurei  of  Augustus,  and  it  seems  likely  that  it  was  struck  on 
the  imported  aurei. 


J 


Revieivs.  1 39 

Les  Noms  de  I'Egypte. — G.  Daressy.     {Btill.  Inst.  Eg.,  1916,  359.) 

This  is  an  account  of  the  names  Aiguptos  and  Miqri,  and  an  exposure  of  some 
recent  mistakes  in  philology.  The  first  name  is  referred  to  Ha-ka-ptah,  the  name 
of  Memphis;  the  second  to  qur,  "to  press  or  restrain,"  niaqur,  "a  bounded  or 
fortified  place."  But  if  we  may  grant  a  confusion  of  sad  and  sin,  the  Arabic  sur, 
"a  wall,"  would  give  niasur,  "walled,"  more  directly  as  the  fortified  land  west 
of  the  Semites. 

L' administration  locale  sous  I'ancien  Empire. — A.  MORET.  {Cotnptes  Rendus 
Acad.  Inscr.,  1916,  p.  378.) 

The  ofificial  sar,  plural  saru,  is  frequently  met  with  in  all  ages  from  the  Vth  to 
the  XlXth  dynasty.  The  saru  appear  to  be  independent  of  the  royal  service.  In 
the  Old  Kingdom  they  met  in  assembly,  seh,  the  seh  hall  being  a  local  court,  where 
they  judged  suits  relating  to  contracts,  and  punished  delinquents.  In  the  Middle 
Kingdom  the  assembly  of  saru  was  called  the  qenbet,  and  the  members  qenbeti,  or 
corner  men.  This,  M.  Moret  says,  was  because  they  met  in  the  corner  of  the  royal 
hall.  This  would  tie  them  to  be  mere  court  functionaries,  which  seems  hardly  to 
have  been  the  case  until  the  Empire.  They  judged  contracts,  the  division  of 
property,  wills  and  sales.  In  the  Empire  there  was  a  "great  qenbet"  in  the  capitals, 
and,  therefore,  lesser  qenbets  locally. 

The  Koptos  decrees  show  somewhat  of  the  scope  of  the  saru.  They  issued 
orders,  saru,  different  from  the  royal  decrees,  uzu.  These  orders  had  to  be  counter- 
signed by  the  Director  of  the  South,  and  no  lesser  official,  before  they  were  issued 
as  binding  on  the  Nome.  The  orders  of  the  saru  were  administered  by  the  royal 
officials.  The  saru  settled  the  corvee  for  the  palace  or  temples,  and  the  incidence 
of  local  taxation.  Tenants  who  became  rich  rose  to  be  saru  ;  they  were  placed 
under  a  sar  to  collect  the  rents  and  manage  the  estate.  Maspero  sums  up  that  the 
saru  were  the  mesheykh  of  modern  Egypt,  and  were  qualified  by  birth,  or  alliance, 
or  fortune,  or  wisdom,  or  age.     They  were  not  nominated  by  the  king. 

It  would  .seem  then  that  they  must  have  been  co-opted.  They  represent  a 
primitive  form  of  government  of  headmen,  a  parliament  of  the  Nome,  which  retained 
its  independence,  like  English  town  councils,  with  the  right  of  local  assessment 
of  taxes,  levied  in  block  by  the  king.  All  cases  which  did  not  touch  the  royal 
rights  seem  to  have  been  left  to  their  control.  This  is  an  interesting  view  of  the 
relation  of  central  and  local  government  in  early  ages. 

Six  nouveaux gisements prcliistoriques  dans  PAzaouad. — Dr.  C.\PITAN.  {Comptes 
Rendus  Acad.  Inscr.,  19 16,  p.  445.) 

This  concerns  a  region  covering  about  400  miles  north  of  Timbuktu.  The  writer 
agrees  that  it  is  only  reasonable  to  assign  flints  of  types  known  in  Europe  to  the 
same  age  as  in  Europe,  as  we  have  done  in  ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1915,  pp.  59,  122. 
He  details  various  stations:  (i)  Erg  Jinefart,  200  or  300  miles  north  of  Timbuktu, 
with  flat,  oval  and  lanceolate  haches,  like  the  Upper  Chellean ;  they  show  a 
numerous  quaternary  population  in  what  is  now  one  of  the  most  dangerous  regions 
of  shifting  sands.  (2)  Near  Taodenit,  400  miles  north  of  Timbuktu,  there  are 
small  mounds,  apparently  remains  of  dwellings,  with  fragments  of  pottery  and 
grinding  stones,  borers,  and  mortars.  The  weight  of  these  shows  a  settled  popu- 
lation, and  the  use  of  them  proves  that  they  were  agricultural.  (3)  At  Kolle,  west 
of  Timbuktu,  near  the  Senegal  river,  are  many  tools  made  of  a  black  sort  of  lava 
called  labradorite.     (This  seems  contradictory.)     Some  are  large  cylindrical  picks, 


1 40  Reviews. 

axes,  adzes,  as  in  the  upper  beds  of  the  Somme,  and  as  at  Spiennes ;  apparently 
neolithic.  (4)  A  little  north  of  this,  at  Agamami,  are  similar  tools,  but  especially 
large  discoid  pieces,  some  of  which  have  most  of  one  face  removed  by  a  single 
big  flake  ;    this  is  like  the  European   Mousterian,  and  is  very  usual  in  Egypt. 

(5)  Bafoulabe,  on  left  bank  of  Upper  Senegal,  has  a  gravel  from  which  have  been 
worked  cores  and  small  tools,  apparently  pigmy  flints.     Probably  late  neolithic. 

(6)  Sikasso,  same  region  as  last.  Polished  axes  found,  some  almost  cylindrical, 
others  splayed,  others  short  and  wide-edged ;  made  of  diorite,  labradorite,  or 
haematite.  They  are  now  considered  of  magic  value.  These  observations  show  a 
wide  spread  of  man  in  various  ages,  where  now  the  conditions  have  greatly  changed 
for  the  worse.  This  is  to  be  expected,  looking  at  the  great  differences  of  sea-level 
and  climate  in  the  Prehistoric  ages. 

Excavations  at  Tell  el-Amarna. — L.  BORCHARDT.     (Smithsonian  Report,  1916.) 

The  systematic  clearance  of  the  houses  of  Amarna  by  the  German  expedition 
before  the  war  is  here  summarised.  The  ancient,  like  the  modern,  Egyptians 
disregarded  occasional  floods  when  choosing  sites,  and  a  large  number  of  their 
houses  are  found  in  the  valley  now  covered  with  six  or  eight  feet  of  gravel  and  sand 
washed  down.  Even  European  houses  near  Cairo  are  built  where  a  rare  storm 
will  wash  away  the  whole  house  and  furniture,  and  leave  only  a  mud  heap. 
Although  the  houses  were  generally  enclosed  with  their  gardens  in  a  high  boundary 
wall,  as  in  modern  Egypt,  yet  in  one  case  an  outside  garden,  seen  by  the  public, 
was  provided.  The  custom  of  walling  up  doorways,  on  leaving  a  house,  was  also 
found  to  be  usual.  The  largest  house  cleared  was  that  of  the  General  Rames.  In 
this,  the  doorways  were  of  stone,  and  inscribed  with  the  names  of  Rames  and  his 
wife.  The  walls  are  preserved  to  about  five  feet  high,  so  that  the  painting  of  the 
large  hall  can  be  followed.  It  does  not  seem  that  any  figure  paintings  were  found, 
like  those  of  the  princesses  (Oxford)  or  in  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  V.  A  resin  and 
mud  head  of  a  baboon,  and  relief  of  the  king  and  queen,  were  found,  which  are 
supposed  to  be  the  modelling  material  of  the  artist.  The  relief,  however,  has  a 
raised  margin  to  it,  which  shows  that  it  has  been  cast  from  a  mould,  and  the 
buckled  and  wavy  state  of  the  surface  suggests  that  it  was  from  a  repoussee  sheet 
of  metal.  Certainly  there  is  no  trace  of  a  surface  such  as  would  be  left  by 
modelling  upon  the  resin.  Some  fine  ivory  carvings  were  also  found,  of  the  old 
subject  of  smiting  enemies  before  a  god ;  but  as  they  are  of  Tehutmes  IV,  they 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  New  Art.  Two  cuneiform  tablets  were  found,  both 
imperfect.  One  is  a  syllabary,  the  other  a  composition  called  "  King  of  the  Battle," 
describing  a  campaign  in  Western  Asia. 

Hellenistic  Tapestries  in  America. — W.  iSHERWOOD  Fox.  {Art  and  Archae- 
ology, 1917,  161.) 

This  is  an  enthusiastic  article  on  the  Roman  figure  textiles,  with  10  illustrations. 
Though  of  Roman  or  Byzantine  age,  the  subjects  are  rather  Hellenistic  with 
Oriental  influences.  The  whole  of  the  purple  tints,  violet,  blue-black,  brown-black, 
or  carmine,  are  due  to  modifications  of  madder.  The  art  of  these  subjects  cannot 
be  taken  by  itself,  as  Mr.  Fox  is  inclined  to  do,  but  must  stand  as  a  part  of  the 
style  of  the  time  in  sarcophagi,  ivory  carving,  and  illuminations.  It  is  a  part  of 
the  great  question  debated  by  Strzygowsky  and  the  late  Jean  Maspero,  as  to  the 
extent  of  different  influences  in  the  later  Empire. 


(     141     ) 


^     NOTES   AND    NEWS. 


We  are  favoured  with  the   following   remarks  by  Mr.  Somers   Clarke,  upon   the 
recent  papier  by  Mr.  Davies : — 

"  May  it  not  be  possible  that  Mr.  N.  de  G.  Davies  has  misinterpreted  the  rough 
plan  shown  on  p.  23,  in  Part  I,  Ancient  Egypt,  1917,  and  has  gone  wide  of  the 
intention  of  the  maker  of  it  ?     Is  it  a  ground  plan  ? 

"  Mr.  Davies  thinks  it  possible.  He  claims  for  it  no  sort  of  accuracy  ;  indeed, 
it  is  very  evident  that  it  is  not  drawn  to  scale.  To  what  period  does  it  belong  ? 
The  quarry,  being  near  the  Nile,  may  have  been  in  use  long  after  the  time  of 
Akhenaten. 

"  What  may  it  be  other  than  a  ground  plan  ? 

"  A  study  of  the  blocks  of  stone  forming  a  temple,  either  partly  in  ruins  or 
never  completed,  makes  it  very  clear  that  there  was  a  well-arranged  system  of 
communication  between  the  temple-builders  on  the  one  hand  and  the  quarry- 
master  on  the  other.  From  the  temple  a  notice  was  sent  to  the  quarry  stating  that 
blocks  approximating  to  certain  dimensions  were  required. 

"  Nor  was  that  all.  The  form  of  certain  stones  required  was  also  indicated. 
Drums,  or  half-drums,  for  columns  were  demanded,  or  it  might  be  lintels  or  ceiling 
slabs,  door  heads,  etc. 

"  To  give  an  example.  We  may  observe  at  Karnak,  in  the  Third  Pylon,  that 
certain  half-drums  of  columns  being  in  hand,  the  builder  made  use  of  these  as 
walling  stones  and  not  as  columns. 

"  In  the  quarries  themselves  is  evidence  that  blocks  of  stone  were  cut  according 
to  order  for  special  purposes.  The  bulk  of  the  material  extracted  was  in  blocks 
for  walling,  one  stone  very  similar  to  the  other. 

"  When  we  reflect  that  the  greatest  number  of  large  blocks  of  stone  made  use 
of  in  an  Egyptian  temple  were  for  the  columns  and  roof,  it  becomes  evident  that 
the  quarrymaster  would  be  more  interested  in  securing  suitable  blocks  for  these 
purposes  than  for  the  walls ;  but  even  for  the  walls  stones  of  some  size  are  needful 
for  doorways,  lintels  and  thresholds. 

"  May  we  read  the  plan  in  question  as  indicating  a  building  with  brick  and  not 
stone  walls.  The  quarrymaster  was  therefore  not  interested  in  these  walls.  This 
the  drawing  seems  to  indicate. 

"  The  plan  of  the  building,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  certainly  not  like  that  of  a 
temple,  so  far  as  we  know  it. 

"  In  the  tomb  of  Huia  at  Tell  el-Amarna,  there  is,  well  preserved,  a  plan  of  a 
temple  which  it  is  fair  to  suppose  is  that  of  an  ideally  perfect  structure.  By  making 
use  of  the  word  "  ideal,"  I  would  not  suggest  .some  flight  of  fancy,  but  an  indication 
of  a  temple  complete  in  all  the  parts,  such  as  might  be  hoped  a  finished  temple 
would  be.  The  great  entrance  pylon,  courts,  etc.,  are  all  shown.  The  sunrays 
shine  down  upon  the  roof  of  the  sanctuary.  Doubtless  there  were  many  such  in 
Egypt,  though  now  we  find  but  one  left  complete — at  Edfu. 


142  Notes  and  News. 

"  In  the  plan  under  consideration,  the  columns  in  the  portico,  and  certain  of 
those  in  the  more  remote  part  of  the  building,  could  not  have  been  joined  by 
architraves,  being  too  far  apart.     Possibly  a  timber  roof  was  here  employed. 

"  Can  we  venture  to  draw  any  conclusion  as  to  temple  plans  until  we  arrive  at 
the  XVII Ith  dynasty  ?  The  few  earlier  remains,  attached  to  Pyramids,  are  in  all 
cases  the  ruins  of  funerary  temples,  as  are  so  many  of  those  of  the  XVIIIth  and 
XlXth  dynasties. 

"  In  the  plan  under  consideration  there  is  no  trace  of  a  sanctuary.  In 
undoubted  temple  plans,  big  or  little,  the  sanctuary  is  the  kernel  of  the  nut ;  the 
shell  has  often  taken  centuries  to  enclose  the  kernel.  Where  is  the  sanctuary  on 
this  plan  ?  ^ 

"  Can  Mr.  Davies,  by  indications  on  the  spot,  assign  any  date  to  the  drawing  of 
the  plan  under  consideration  ? 

"  It  seems  safe  to  affirm  that  the  building  represented  was  not  a  temple  plan  of 
the  period  of  Akhenaten,  nor,  as  I  believe,  of  any  later  period. 

"SOMERS  Clarke." 


With  the  greatest  regret  we  hear  of  the  sudden  blow  to  work  in  Egypt,  by 
the  loss  of  one  of  the  most  active  officials.  Georges  Legrain  had  done  more  than 
anyone  to  recover  and  restore  the  great  monuments  of  Egypt,  and  every  visitor 
knew  of  his  immense  work  at  Karnak.  He  had  apparently  been  much  hindered 
and  thwarted  by  opposition  and  difficulties  lately,  and  had  felt  it  necessary  to  stay 
during  the  summer  to  care  for  his  work.  On  Sunday,  19th  August,  he  wrote  to  a 
friend :  "  I  can  do  no  more.  I  have  never  suffered  thus.  I  must  leave.  I  shall 
take  the  train  on  Thursday  evening."  Alas !  on  Wednesday  the  22nd  he  died  at 
Luxor. 

An  old  friend  of  Egyptology  has  passed  away  by  the  death  of  Mrs.  Grenfell, 
at  Oxford,  on  August  8th.  Her  bright  and  incisive  remarks  and  questions  will 
always  be  remembered  by  her  friends.  She  had  for  years  past  been  most 
persevering  in  collecting  photographs  and  copies  of  scarabs,  and  her  studies  on 
them  were  published  in  the  Recueil,  the  Rendiconti  of  the  Lincei,  Ancient  Egypt, 
And  \he  Journal  of  Egyptian  Arc/iaeoiogy.  Besides  these  permanent  productions, 
her  labours  of  collecting  material  will  happily  not  be  lost,  as  her  son.  Prof.  Grenfell, 
purposes  that  they  shall  be  of  use  for  students  at  University  College,  London. 
After  a  life  full  of  activity  in  many  different  interests  and  ways,  and  of  deep 
gratification  in  Prof  Grenfell's  great  results,  rest  came  to  her  in  a  tranquil  and 
painless  failure. 

The  first  of  our  fellow  workers  of  the  British  School  that  the  war  has  removed 
was  Lieutenant  Thomas  B.  Butler-Stoney,  J. P.,  at  the  age  of  42.  He  joined  our 
work  at  Tell  el-Yehudiyeh  and  other  sites,  and  many  of  his  drawings  illustrate 
"  Hyjssos  and  Israelite  cities."  None  have  left  a  more  engaging  memory,  by  his 
conscientious  work  and  his  sweetness  of  character.  After  that  time  the  duties  of 
a  landlord  made  him  carefully  study  agriculture,  and  follow  home  pursuits  ;  but  he 
never  lost  his  interest  in  Egypt,  and  we  owe  to  him  the  lettering  of  the  title  on  the 
cover  of  this  Journal.  His  artistic  work  is  known  both  bj'  paintings  and  by  book 
illustration.  He  entered  the  army  in  1914,  the  fifth  month  of  war;  seriously 
wounded  both  last  year  and  again  this  year,  he  died  from  these  wounds  on  30th 
September. 


Notes  and  Neivs.  143 

The  death  of  the  Hon.  Jeremiah  Lynch  claims  a  place  here  as  one  of  our 
well-wishers  and  Hon.  Secretaries,  in  San  Francisco.  He  had  mining  experience 
in  America,  then  lived  some  time  in  Cairo,  and  published  a  book  of  Egyptian 
Sketches  in  1890.,  This  deals  partly  with  the  antiquities,  and  describes  the  breaking 
up  of  the  fallen  casing  of  the  Third  Pyramid  for  hotel  building.  Eight  years  later 
he  started  out  for  Klondike,  with  considerable  capital  and  experience.  He 
introduced  there  steam-thawing  for  the  ground,  which  is  always  frozen  at  four  feet 
down  ;  he  made  a  great  success,  and  then  published  Three  Years  in  Klondike.  He 
had  a  facility  in  precise  and  picturesque  description  of  characters  and  things. 
A  year  before  the  war  he  was  in  Egypt,  and  bought  two  decorated  mummies,  to 
replace  those  which  were  destroyed  at  his  club  in  the  great  fire  at  San  Francisco. 

A  new  quarterly  periodical  is  announced,  Sudan  Notes  and  Records,  under  the 
management  of  Mr.  Crowfoot,  the  Director  of  Education.  His  name  is  a  guarantee 
that  the  antiquities  will  not  be  overlooked  among  the  many  subjects  of  interest  in 
the  Sudan.  Mr.  R.  Wedd  is  the  Secretary,  to  whom  the  annual  subscription  of 
lOf.  6d.  should  be  sent,  at  the  Lands  Department,  Khartum. 

Mr.  Seymour  de  Ricci  is  at  present  interpreter  with  the  British  Forces  in 
France.  He  is  also  engaged  on  a  bibliography  of  the  works  at  present  of  value  in 
Egyptology. 

Lieut.  Brunton  is  working  seventeen  hours  a  day  in  directing  the  Egyptian 
Labour  Corps  in  France.  We  hear  that,  also,  the  Chinese  are  much  employed  in 
the  factories  of  Marseilles. 

The  Egyptian  Gazette  gives  particulars  of  the  Philadelphia  expedition  at 
Memphis,  clearing  the  palace  of  Merenptah,  which  was  discovered  by  the  British 
School.  The  limits  of  the  building  are  not  yet  reached,  so  the  plan  is  not  defined. 
The  large  court  90  x  1 50  feet  has  the  bases  of  columns,  but  the  shafts  were  gone 
or  overthrown.  Two  other  halls  have  figures  of  the  gods  and  scenes,  still  retaining 
some  colour.  The  bath  room  has  been  found,  and  some  large  doorways  ;  but  the 
places  had  sufiered  greatly  from  stone-looters,  even  the  pavements  being  much 
destroyed.  It  does  not  appear  that  anything  of  new  historic  or  artistic  importance 
has  been  found.  As  the  building  is  three  feet  under  water  at  high  Nile  it  is  not 
thought  practicable  to  preserve  it,  and  parts  are  being  removed  to  museums. 


i^ 


144 


SCOTTISH  WOMEN'S   HOSPITALS, 
LONDON   UNITS. 

At  the  outbreak  of  war,  when  the  attention  of  all  of  us  was  diverted  from  Egypt, 
it  seemed  obvious  that  one  must  utilise  any  large  organisation  at  one's  command, 
for  purposes  of  war  relief.     It  was  agreed  by  the  Committee  of  the  British  School 
that  I  should  make  a  collection  of  funds  from  the  members  of  the  School,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Ofificers'  Families  Fund.     During  1915,  therefore,  I  raised  over  ;^i,ooo 
in  donations  from  our  members,  and  when  Lady  Hope  resigned  from  that  Society 
we  ceased  to  collect  for  it.     As  I  had  been  specially  interested  in  the  beginnings  of 
the  Scottish  Women's  Hospitals  (N.U.W.S.S.)  in  1914,  joined  their  London  Com- 
mittee, began  to  raise  funds  for  the  London  Units,  and  was  elected  Hon.  Secretary 
in   191 5,  the  Committee  of  the  British  School  agreed  in  1916  that  I  might  con- 
centrate on  collecting  funds  for  these  Units.     During  the   past  year,  I  have  been 
sending  to  members  of  the  School  a  combined  appeal  for  payment  of  the  annual 
contribution  to  Egyptian  research,  and  a  donation  to  the  Hospital  Units.      We 
issue  a  list  of  the  donations  which  have,  so  far,  been  received  : — 
"  Seaton  Bed":  Iron  Trades  Employers'  Insurance  Assoc, /*^r  A.  E.  Seaton,    £7S- 
Henry  Amis,  collections  made  by   ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...     ;^6i    igs. 

Dr.  J.  J.  Acworth,  Stewart  Margetson        ...         ...         ...         ...      each     ;fio  lOj. 

Miss  H.  Davies,  John  Masefield,  Mrs.  Middleton,  Miss  Whidborne   each  ;^5 

H.  Gaselee,  Mrs.  Llewellin,  Miss  E.  Shove,  M.B.,  Miss  B.  Vickers     each       £^     35. 
Miss  E.  Andrews,  J.  F.  Chance,  C.  H.  Corbett,  Miss  Corry,  Miss    M.   Crosfield, 

Miss    Dobson,    R.    C.    Michell,    Mrs.    Alex.    Muirhead,    H.    Oppenheimer, 

Mrs.  Rawlinson  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...     each       £2     2s. 

H.  J.  Martin,  £2   is.       Miss  Bellew,  Somers  Clarke,  M.  P.  Coode    each  £2 

Mrs.  Allen,  Mrs.  Robert  Blake,  Dr.  Estlin  Carpenter,  Most  Hon.  the  Marquess  of 

Crewe,  J.  R.  Heape,  Miss  G.  Lister,  Frank  Morey,  F.  W.  Percival,  Mrs.  Wynne 

Paynter      ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...   each       £1      is. 

Mrs.  Cawthorne,  Miss  Eckenstein,    Miss   M.  C.   Martineau    (the   late),   Miss    M. 

Reddaw each  £1 

Rev.  G.  H.  Aitken,  Miss  E.  Austin,  Miss  H.  R.  Cowan,  Miss  H.  Farquhar,  Miss 

Miles,  Miss  E.  Mounsey,  N.  F.  Winckworth    ...         ...  ...    each  Jos. 

Miss  Adam,  ^s.  6d.         Mrs.  Alder,  Mrs.  E.  W.  Browne    ...         ...    each  5^-. 

It  is  proposed  that  the  subscribers  to  ANCIENT  EGYPT  should  be  also  asked 
to  send  a  donation  to  this  relief  fund,  to  swell  the  amount  which  members  of  the 
School  are  so  generously  contributing.  It  is  only  in  the  past  two  months,  when 
an  office  holiday  gave  opportunity  for  application  to  the  task,  that  I  have  seriously 
begun  to  work  up  this  fund,  and  £2^y  6s.  6d.  is  the  total  at  present  reached. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  much  about  the  S.W.H.,  they  are  so  well  known 
after  their  chequered  career  in  Serbia  and  half-a-dozen  other  countries.  We  are 
responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  two  Field  Hospitals,  under  Dr.  Elsie  Inglis,  and 
a  Motor  Transport  Section,  attached  to  the  ist  Serbian  Division  of  the  Russian 
army  in  Rumania.  Those  who  prefer  to  help  our  French  ally  can  contribute  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  London  Ward  in  the  Abbaye  de  Royaumont.  We  have 
to  raise  ;^i,ooo  a  month  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  London  Units. 

May  I  invite  donations  from  any  readers  of  ANCIENT  Egypt?  Small  sums 
are  gratefully  received,  and  should  be  sent  (crossed  London,  County  and  West- 
minster Bank)  to  H.  Flinders  Petrie,  Hon.  Sec.  S.W.H.,  University  College, 
Gower  Street,  W.C,  i. 

H.  Flinders  Petrie, 
Au£-usi,  1 917.  If  on.  Secretary. 


.a 


H 


k 


STATUE    OF    NEFER-SMA-AA. 


BLACK    BASALT, 


COWPER    COLLECTION. 


,''' 


ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


I 


THE    VOICE    OF    NECESSITY. 

"What  we  have  set  our  hands  to  the  plough  to  do — to  win  this  war 
properly — is  going  to  call  for  every  ounce  of  energy  directed  into  the 
right  channels.  .  .  .  The  first  duty  which  rests  on  every  man,  woman, 
and  child  in  this  country  to-day  is  so  to  order  their  lives  that  they  make 
the  least  possible  demand  at  all  times  upon  the  energy  of  others.  .  .  . 
As  Minister  of  National  Service  I  want  to  .say  to  you  here  and  now  that 
your  first  duty  to  the  State  is  to  use  nothing,  to  buy  nothing,  that  you 
can  get  on  without.  .  .  .  Think  all  the  time  :  '  How  can  1  make  the 
least  po.ssible  call  upon  the  energy  of  my  fellow  men  .'* '  That  is  the 
first  duty  of  us  all." — (Sir  Auckland  Geddes.) 

Such  is  the  unhesitating  voice  of  a  man  who  sees  the  necessities  which  have 
been  obvious  for  some  time  past,  but  have  not  been  proclaimed.  So  long  as  the 
flood  of  printing  was  unabated  in  useless  channels,  it  was  reasonable  to  keep 
up  a  scientific  journal.  Now  that  the  true  course  is  to  be  really  enforced  on  the 
main  outlets  of  expenditure  that  is  not  essential,  we  must  have  no  hesitation  in 
following  the  right  line  for  our  country's  welfare.  To  continue  any  journal  which 
does  not  help  the  war  is  treachery  to  our  own  cause.  Paper,  print,  and  postal 
work  are  all  needed  to  be  reduced,  and  our  only  right  course  is  to  pause  in  the 
issue  of  this  journal,  however  desirable  it  may  be  to  keep  up  historical  interests. 

We  must  therefore  suspend  the  publication  of  An'CIENT  Egvpt  for  a  year; 
hoping  that  1919  may  see  conditions  for  its  continuance.  The  summaries  of 
Journals  will  be  resumed  from  the  present  point ;  and  we  beg  contributors  to 
send  articles  and  news,  for  the  issue  when  resumed.  There  is  no  lack  of  demand 
by  subscribers  for  such  a  journal ;  and  the  interest  from  the  reserves  of  the 
British  School  would  much  more  than  cover  the  whole  cost  of  it.  There  is  no 
question,  therefore,  of  its  continuance  in  future,  when  the  present  wrecking  of  the 
world  can  be  brought  to  a  stop,  and  the  rights  of  humanity,  of  good  faith,  and  of 
treaties  are  once  more  enforced  by  civilisation. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie. 

K 


(     146     ) 


STATUE   OF   NEFER-SMA-AA. 
(with  three  plates.) 

The  statue,  formerly  in  the  Hope  Collection  and  now  in  the  possession  of 
Mr.  H.  S.  Cowper,  is  of  black  basalt,  and  dates  to  the  Salte  period,  about  600  B.C. 
It  represents  an  elderly  man,  clean  shaven  and  bald,  carrying  a  shrine  in  which 
stands  the  image  of  a  god  wearing  the  double  crown.     The  feet  of  the  statue  are 

broken  away,  and  the  fractured  part  has  been  cut  level 
to  make  it  stand  firmly  on  the  modern  pedestal.  The 
feet  and  the  base,  on  which  there  was  probably  an  in- 
scription, are  therefore  lost.  The  accompanying  diagram, 
drawn  by  the  present  owner  of  the  statue,  shows  exactly 
how  much  is  missing.  From  this  it  appears  that  none 
of  the  inscription  at  the  back  has  been  lost  or  destroyed  ; 
a  supposition  borne  out  by  the  squeeze,  which  shows  a 
blank  space  at  the  bottom  of  the  first  line  and  between 

the  vertical  lines  below  the  ^kK^ ,  a  space  large  enough 

to  contain  more  than  one  sign.  In  the  second  line 
enough  remains  of  the  enclosing  vertical  lines  to  show 

^     another  blank  space  at  the  bottom  below     |^-lj. 

The  costume  of  the  figure  consists  of  a  long  straight  garment  hanging  without 
a  fold  from  the  armpits  to  the  ankles,  probably  representing  a  single  piece  of  cloth 
wrapped  round  the  body,  the  opening  being  at  the  right  side  in  front.  Across  the 
chestjs'a  long  roll  which  may  possibly  be  part  of  the  clothing,  but  may  with  equal 
likelihood  represent  the  insignia  of  an  office  or  an  amulet  case  containing  written 
charms.  Covering  the  left  side  of  the  chest  is  a  triangular  piece  of  cloth  which 
may  have  been  fastened  to  the  garment  or  to  something  beneath ;  at  the  shoulder 
it  appears  to  be  twisted,  widens  again  into  a  triangular  form  over  the  left  shoulder- 
blade,  and  disappears  under  the  garment  at  the  back  ;  the  effect  is  of  a  kind  of 
sleeve.     Both  the  roll  and  the  pseudo-sleeve  are  unusual. 

The  inscription  down  the  back  is  in  two  vertical  columns  of  incised 
hieroglyphs : — 

1.  "  The  great  one ;  the  worthy  one  of  Thoth,  great  king  of  the  North' ;  prophet 
of  Khepery;*  beloved  of  Min  and  of  Neith  of  Sats;"  prophet  of  Uazt,  lady  of 
Mynt  ;*  scribe  of  the  name  and  accounts  of  Thoth  ;^  scribe  of  the 

2.  Five,"  the  guardians  of  the  lake  of  Great  Sals  and  Little  Sals  ;'  Nefer- 

sma-4ia,  son  of  Ni-Hor-pa-sa-Yst,*  the  name  of  his  mother mau,'  follower  of 

his  god,'"  praised  of  his  Nome,  strong  one  of  divine  offerings."'' 

On  the  shrine  below  the  figure  of  the  god  are  the  words :  "  Atmu,  lord  of 
Sals.'"- 


\ 


Inscription  on  Shrine. 


J^ 


NEFER-SMA-AA. 


1-^ 


NEFER-SMA-AA. 


Statue  of  Nefer-Sma^Aa. 


H7 


Notes. 

'  The  king  of  the  North.      As  a   title   of   Thoth    this    is 
unusual ;  the  epithet  is  given  to  him  as  Lord  of  the  northern 

Hermopolis,  of  which  the  Egyptian  name  was    ^^ ,  the  X Vth 

Nome  of  Lower  Egypt.  The  figure  of  the  king  wearing  the 
Red  Crown  is  uncommon  when  standing  alone;  it  seldom  occurs 
except  in  connection  with  a  companion  figure  wearing  the 
White  Crown.  The  royal  crowns  are  always  interesting,  the 
Red  Crown  particularly  so.  Their  magical  powers  are  often 
mentioned,  and  they  are  clearly  looked  upon  as  feminine 
divinities,  for  they  are  represented  on  the  basket-sign  which 
is  the  token  of  the  primitive  goddes.ses.  The  inscription  of 
Khenti-em-khast,  of  the  XI  1th  dynasty  (Sharpe,  Inscriptions, 
PI.  XXIX),  gives  a  certain  amount  of  information  on  the  subject. 
His  most  important  title  was  "  Chief  of  the  Secrets  of  the  royal 
kheker,"  and,  from  the  context,  this  appears  to  mean  that  he 
was  charged  with  the  preparation  and  custody  of  the  two  crowns. 
The  Red  Crown  was  the  more  dangerously  magical  of  the  two, 
for,  in  1.  8,  Khenti-em-khast  is  said  to  be  "  He  whose  footsteps 
are  taboo  (lit.  guarded  against)  when  adorning  the  Red  Crown 
at  the  Appearing  of  Horus,  Lord  of  the  Palace."  Still  earlier, 
the  magical  qualities  of  the  Red  Crown  are  even  more  apparent. 
Like  its  fellow,  the  White  Crown,  it  was  Urt-hekau,  "  Great  One 
of  magic,"  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  ;  and  it  is  apostrophised  in 
the  Unas  text  (1.  272),  each  epithet  being  determined  by  the 
Red  Crown  on  a  basket,  with  the  exception  of  the  last,  which 
has  the  uraeus  :  "O  Neith,  O  Yny,  O  Urt,  O  Urt-hekau,  O  Elame, 
grant  thou  (fern.)  that  Unas  be  cut  in  pieces  as  thou  (fem.)  art 
cut  in  piece-s."  Another  statement  in  the  Unas  text  (1.  518) 
shows  that  the  ancient  idea  of  acquiring  mrigical  powers  by 
eating  was  prevalent  at  the  time :  "  Unas  has  devoured  the 
Red  Crown,  he  has  swallowed  the  White  Crown." 

^  Khepery.     The  (1  is  here  placed  before  the  W . 
*  The  writing   <=z>    is  a  variant  of  the  earlier 


O 


Hill 


The  Egyptian  <:=>  appears  to  have  been 

always  liable  to  lose  the  value  R  and  to  interchange  with  (J. 
Neith  of  SaYs  was  one  of  the  most  important  deities  of  ancient 
Egypt  ;  she  is  a  goddess  without  a  consort,  yet  as  early  as  the 
Pyramid  Texts  Sebek  is  called  her  son  (Unas,  1.  627),  and  as 
late  as  the  XXV Ith  dynasty  Neith  is  represented  suckling 
crocodiles.  The  goddess  herself  is  always  represented  in  human 
form,  but  her  name  may  be  determined  with  her  emblems,  the 
Red  Crown,  the  shield  and  arrows,  or  the  so-called  shuttle. 
The  quotation  from  the  Unas  text,  given  in  Note  i,  suggests 
that  at  one  time  the  goddess,  in  the  person  of  her  representative, 
was  put  to  death  and  dismembered  in  the  fashion  generally 
connected  with  the  cult  of  Osiris  (see  Murray,  Man,  XIV,  p.  17). 


<vvvv\ 


/V*^-^ 


AAA<\ 


AAJki^ 


^«v>^ 


aaaP 


AAAA 


K    2 


148  Statue  of  Nefer-Sma-Aa. 

*  Uazt,  or  Buto,  the  goddess  of  the  North.  She  is  here  called  Lady  of  Mynt, 
a  place  which  is  identified  by  Brugsch  as  "le  nom  du  has  pays  du  18^  district  de 
la  basse  Egypte"  {Diet,  gdog.,  p.  246). 

°  It  is  not  very  clear  what  the  ape  holds  in  his  hand  ;  possibly  the  roll  of 
papyrus,  a  sufficiently  appropriate  emblem  for  the  god  of  writing. 

"  The  title  "  Scribe  of  the  Five,"  is  both  unusual  and  interesting.  In  the  Old 
Kingdom,  "  Great  One  of  l-'ive  of  the  House  of  Thoth,"  is  the  title  of  the  High-priest 
of  Hermopolis.  Like  all  the  High-priesthoods,  it  is  a  rare  title,  considerably  more 
so  than  that  of  Memphis,  probably  because  the  Old  Kingdom  cemeteries  of 
Hermopolis  have  not  yet  been  fully  worked  and  recorded.  The  Five  were  clearly 
the  Council  of  the  Temple,  of  whom  the  Great  One  was  the  Chief.  If  in  this 
inscription  sau  she  is  in  apposition  with  The  Five,  we  here  obtain  a  clue  to  their 
functions.  The  Lake  of  Sals  was,  as  Herodotus  points  out,  the  scene  of  the 
passion-play  of  Osiris,  and,  consequently,  one  of  the  most  sacred  spots  in  Egypt. 
Its  peculiar  sanctity  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  man  who  represented  Osiris  was 
put  to  death  by  drowning  (Murray,  A.Z.,  1914,  p.  127),  the  god  himself  having 
met  his  death  in  the  river.  A  stele  of  the  Persian  period  gives  the  place  of  the 
drowning  of  Osiris  as  in  the  Delta. 

'  I  can  find  no  evidence  that  Sals  was  divided  into  two,  or  that  there  were 

two  towns  of  the  name,  but  <^>-^^  and  ffl  ^      suggest   the  translation. 

Gba  means,  literally,  "  weak,  feeble  "  ;  Coptic  ^TlWn. 

"  Mr.  Gunn  suggests  that  the  name  may  be  read  "  Sma-taui,"  not  Nefer-sma-aa. 
Of  the  father's  name  Hor-pa-sa-Yst  is  the  more  usual  form,  though  Ni-hor-pa-sa- 
Yst,  "  He  who  belongs  to  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,"  is  probably  more  correct. 

"  The  title  (?)  and  name  are  obscure.     Lion  names  are  always  rare. 

'"  As  so  often  happens  in  late  writing,  the  sign  ^,  original ly_/a,  is  used  as/ 

"  The  exact  meaning  of  nekht  en  neter  hetep  is  not  clear ;  neither  is  the  con- 
nection clear  between  the  three  epithets. 

>^  The    place-name    is  spelt  HD  @,  which   I   take  to  be  an  attempt  to 

represent  the  two-syllabled  word  SaTs. 

We  have  to  thank  Mr.  Cowper  for  the  photographs  and  for  a  squeeze  from 
which  the  inscription  is  here  drawn. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


(     H9    ) 


THE   LIBE^LUS   OR   CERTIFICATE   OF   PAGAN   SACRIFICE 
DEMANDED    BY   THE   EDICT   OF   DECIUS. 


Among  the  wonderful  discoveries  of  ancient  literature  and  records  illustrating  the 
life  of  the  Egyptian  people  in  Roman  times  by  means  of  the  papyrus,  there  is  one 
form  of  document  which  throws  great  light  upon  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  early 
Christianity  which  is  not  so  well  known  as  it  should  be. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  recent  results  of  the  recovery  of  many  manuscripts 
from  the  sand,  and  public  attention  has  not  yet  been  attracted  to  the  subject.  The 
following  particulars  will  prove  it  to  be  a  matter  of  much  interest,  and  an  important 
addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  times. 

Of  all  the  persecutions  endured  by  the  early  Christians  under  the  Roman 
emperors,  that  suffered  under  Decius  was  the  most  severe,  because  so  universal. 
The  cause  of  this  was  that  the  emperor  adopted  a  new  plan  for  ensuring  the 
return  to  orthodoxy  of  all  wilhin  the  empire's  frontiers.  The  duty  of  seeing  that 
everyone,  men,  women  and  children,  offered  .sacrifice  to  the  pagan  deities,  was 
placed  upon  local  committees  elected  by  the  people  themselves  in  every  town  and 
hamlet. 

Hitherto  the  enforcement  of  laws  had  been  in  the  hands  of  the  administration 
and  its  governors,  praefects,  and  magistrates ;  but,  as  with  India  to-day,  the 
provinces  were  much  understaffed,  and  the  rulers  were  often  placed  over  too  large 
a  population  to  see  that  such  decrees  were  strictly  carried  out.  Each  of  the  new 
local  committees  had  only  so  many  people  to  supervise  as  it  could  properly  attend 
to.  The  obedience  was  compelled  by  requiring  every  person  to  be  provided  with  a 
certificate  of  due  performance,  which  took  the  form  of  an  application  to  the  com- 
missioners for  them  to  certify  compliance  with  the  special  imperial  edict  issued  in 
the  first  regnal  year  of  Decius.  In  order  to  enable  the  commissioners  to  clearly 
comprehend  what  the  edict  demanded,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  wording  of 
the  petition  for  a  certificate  of  performance  was  embodied  in  it.  It  was  practically 
a  request  for  a  written  proof  of  orthodoxy.  The  application  had  to  be  signed  by 
the  petitioner  unless  illiterate,  and  the  fact  of  due  performance  was  to  be  attested 
by  the  signature  of  one  or  more  commissioners. 

These  documents  were  called  "  Libelli,"  and  until  recently  no  specimen  was 
known.  The  number  of  these  libelli  now  known  to  scholars  and  carefully  edited 
is  twenty-six.  Some  of  these  are  only  fragments,  and  not  now  complete  texts. 
They  relate  to  five  different  towns:  Theadelphia,  Alexandria-Nesos,  Philadelphia, 
Arsinoe,  and  Oxyrhynchus  ;  but  of  the  number  ten  are  from  Theadelphia  alone. 
Their  formulae  are  so  precisely  similar  that,  should  more  be  forthcoming,  it  is  not 
probable  that  variants  of  value  will  be  disclosed.  Doubtless  the  phrases  are  cited 
from  the  terms  Df  the  FIdict,  and  so  the  differences  are  quite  insignificant. 

Some  specimens  have  a  few  words  inserted  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  any, 
or  at  least  in  the  majority,  of  the  others.  If  it  is  desired  to  obtain  a  most  complete 
text  by  absorbing  therein  all  the  words  to  be  derived  from  the  twenty-six  manu- 
scripts, that  can  be  done  by  presenting  the  text  of  one  archetype  copy  and  adding 
to  it  words  there  absent  but  present  in  other  copies — these  extra  words  being 

K  3 


1 50     Libellus  or  Certificate  of  Pagan  Sacrifice  demanded  by  the  Edict  of  Decius. 

indicated  as  being  so  by  placing  them  within  brackets.     The  followmg  text  is  the 
result  of  exhibiting  the  libellus  sentences  in  this  manner: — 

"To  the  commissioners  of  the  village  of  Alexandrou-Nesos,  elected  to 
superintend  the  (sacred  offerings  and  the)  sacrifices.  From  Aurelius  Diogenes. 
son  of  Satabos,  of  the  village  of  Alexandrou-Nesos,  aged  72  years,  with  a  scar  on 
his  right  eyebrow.  I  have  at  all  times  (of  my  life)  offered  sacrifices  (and  libations) 
(and  manifested  my  piety)  to  the  gods,  and  now  again  in  accordance  with  the  Edict 
in  your  presence  I  have  made  sacrifice,  and  libations,  and  partaken  of  the  .sacred 
offerings,  and  I  request  you  to  certify  this  statement.  May  you  prosper.  I, 
Aurelius  Diogenes,  have  presented  this  application.  I,  Aurelius  Syros,  have 
witnessed  your  sacrifice.  The  first  year  of  the  Emperor  Caesar  Gains  Messius 
Quintus  Trajanus  Decius,  pious  and  prosperous,  Augustu.s,  on  the  second  of  the 
month  Epiphi." 

Although  the  actual  legal  phraseology  of  the  libelli  is  practically  identical, 
there  were  variations  in  the  status  of  the  persons  concerned,  or  private  matters 
and  fancies,  that  caused  minor  diversities  in  their  wording.  These  can  better  be 
set  forth  by  mentioning  them  severally  as  additions  to  or  deviations  from  what 
may  be  termed  the  basic  text  just  given,  which  is  one  for  a  single  male  person, 
and  the  formula  of  which  is  probably  derived  from  the  phrase  of  the  Edict. 

Thus  one  of  the  earliest  examples  found  is  a  certificate  for  two  brothers  and 
their  wives.  The  names  of  the  parents  are  omitted,  but  a  special  addition  is  made 
to  the  name  of  their  city  by  mentioning  that  the  parties  resided  near  the  town 
gate.  Another  libellus  is  of  a  lady  named  "  Aurelia  Ammonous,  priestess  of 
Petesouchos  and  the  gods  of  the  Moeris  quarter."  She,  or  her  amanuensis,  does 
does  not  mention  the  city,  but  states  that  she  lived  in  the  Moeris  district,  so  we 
know  that  it  was  Arsinoe. 

Another  of  these  documents  from  the  same  city  is  that  of  a  lady,  Aurelia 
Demos,  a  name  suggesting  she  was  one  of  the  people.  She  appears  to  have  been 
illegitimate,  for  she  admits  she  "  had  no  father,"  and  so  gives  her  mother's  name  of 
Helena.  She  was  married  to  one  Aurelius  Irenaeus,  and  he  wrote  her  signature 
at  her  request  because  she  was  illiterate.  In  her  case  the  witness  to  her  act  of 
sacrifice  was  the  prytanis  of  the  town.  Another  libellus  is  a  joint  one,  for  a  man, 
his  wife,  their  son  Dioskurus,  and  their  daughter  Lais. 

The  last  libellus  yet  published,  that  of  Aurelius  Gaon,  appears  to  show  that 
he,  or  he  and  his  wife  Taos,  sacrificed  by  proxy  for  one  or  more  of  their  children, 
for  it  reads  :  "  I  have,  etc.,  etc.,  tasted  the  offerings  with  Taos  my  wife  ;  Ammonius 
and  Ammonianus,  my  sons,  and  Thecla,  my  daughter,  acting  through  me."  This 
reminds  one  of  the  statement  in  the  New  Testament  that  if  a  man  believes  he 
shall  be  saved,  and  his  house.  This  libellus,  which  is  from  Oxyrhynchus,  is 
peculiar  in  using  the  words  "divine  decree,"  instead  of  "Edict." 

In  one  of  the  lot  of  libelli  from  Theadelphia,  the  man's  age  is  appended  at 
the  end  before  the  names  of  the  witnesses,  and  it  is  mentioned  that  he  was  an 
invalid.  This  town  appears  to  have  had  many  citizen  immigrants  from  other 
places,  for  when  stating  the  persons  are  certifying  at  Theadelphia,  the  texts  add 
that  they  came  (originally)  from  Apias,  Theoxenis,  Philagris,  and  Arabes.  One 
of  these  documents  has  a  peculiar  interpolation,  setting  forth  that  its  owner  "had 
been  a  member  of  the  house  of  Aurelius  Appianus,  exergetes  of  Alexandria, 
who  bore  many  titles."  This  is  a  personage  well  known  from  other  administrative 
papyrus  documents. 


Libellus  or  Certificate  of  Pagan  Sacrifice  demanded  by  the  Edict  of  Decius.     1 5 1 

It  will  be  noticed  that  all  these  people  bear  the  name  of  Aurelius.  This  is 
because,  about  forty  years  previously,  Aurelius  Caracalla  bestowed  on  all  the 
provincials  the  rights  of  Roman  citizenship,  which  we  know  were  of  such  value  to 
St.  Paul.  These*'rights,  however,  did  not  extend  to  the  dediticii,  or  poll-tax  paying 
class.  The  edict  of  citizenship  is  partly  preserved  in  a  papyrus  now  at  Giessen  ; 
see  Griechische  Papyrien  zu  Giessen,  I,  40. 

The  dates  of  the  twenty-six  libelli  we  have  range  over  thirty-two  days.  There 
was  an  old  Roman  custom  which  allowed  a  period  of  fifty  days  for  compliance 
with  an  edict,  and  this  may  have  been  permitted  in  this  case  ;  but  Decius  appointed 
each  commission  to  sit  permanently  until  every  citizen  in  its  district  had  complied. 

A  perusal  of  the  full  text  of  the  libellus  given  above  shows  that  there  were 
three  ritual  acts  demanded  to  be  enacted  in  order  to  obtain  a  certificate  of  com- 
pliance by  a  signature  to  the  document.  These  acts  were  the  offering  of  incense ; 
the  libation,  which  means  the  pouring  of  some  wine  from  a  cup  upon  the  altar  and 
the  drinking  of  the  remaining  contents ;  and  the  sacramental  participation  in  the 
sacrifice  by  consuming  a  portion  thereof 

The  last  libelli  to  be  edited  in  this  country  may  be  found  in  Part  XII  of  the 
"  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri "  and  the  Catalogue  of  the  Rylands  Library  Papyri  at 
Manchester. 

Joseph  Offord. 


K4 


(       IS2       ) 


THE   ALEXANDRIAN    COINAGE   OF   THE    EIGHTH   YEAR   OF 

GALLIENUS. 

I.  The  issues  of  the  Alexandrian  mint  in  the  eighth  year  of  Gallienus  present 
some  difficulties  of  arrangement,  and  raise  problems  of  chronology  in  connexion 
with  the  temporary  recognition  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus  in  Egypt.  A  discussion 
of  these  points  is  to  be  found  in  the  papers  by  O.  Voetter,  W.  Kubitschek,  and 
K.  Regling  on  the  sons  of  Gallienus  in  Num.  Zeitschr.,  1908  :  but  the  evidence  of 
hoards  throws  further  light  on  the  questions. 

2.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  clear  that  there  was  a  complete  break  in  the  scheme 
of  work  of  the  Alexandrian  mint  at  some  point  in  the  eighth  year.  Up  to  this 
time,  coins  were  struck  with  obverse  types  of  the  various  members  of  the  imperial 
house  and  with  the  same  reverse  types  for  all :  afterwards,  in  each  year  the  reverse 
types  of  Gallienus  and  Salonina  are  distinct.  In  the  earlier  period,  the  obverse 
types  usually,  and  the  reverse  types  frequently,  continued  unchanged  (except  for 
the  dates)  from  year  to  year :  in  the  later  there  was  almost  every  year  an  alteration 
in  the  obverse  type  of  Gallienus,  and  fresh  sets  of  reverse  types  were  introduced 
annually,  with  rare  exceptions  of  the  continuance  of  the  same  type.  There  was  a 
change  in  the  obverse  legend  of  Gallienus  in  year  8,  and  a  very  marked  variation 
in  the  style  and  workmanship  of  the  coins.  This  break  may  be  fully  seen  from  a 
summary  description  of  the  issues. 

3.  The  obverse  types  of  the  various  members  of  the  imperial  house  up  to 
year  8  are  as  follows  : — 

r«/^;'/««.— Legend  throughout  AKnAIOVAA€PIANOCeV€VC.  Bust  r. 
laureate,  wearing  cuirass  and  paludamentum,  with  variations  of  position  :  in  year  i, 
turned  to  show  back  (Fig.  i) :  in  years  2,  3,  4,  and  5,  turned  to  front,  with  paluda- 
mentum thrown  back  (Fig.  2) :  in  years  6,  7,  and  8,  turned  to  front,  with  paluda- 
mentum fastened  across  chest  (Fig.  3).  [I  have  an  anomalous  coin  of  year  7,  on 
which  the  bust  is  as  in  years  2  to  5,  and  the  legend  ends  — NOC€VC€  (Fig.  4).] 

6^«///^««j.— Legend  in  years  1  to  5  AKnAIOVrAAAIHNOC€V€VC :  in 
the  course  of  the  year  5  spelling  altered  to  FAAAIANQC  and  continued  so  to 
year  8.  Bust  r.  laureate,  turned  to  front,  wearing  cuirass  and  paludamentum 
fastened  across  chest,  throughout  period  (Fig.  5  for  earlier,  Fig.  6  for  later  type). 

Salonina. — Coins  first  struck  in  year  3  :  type  unchanged  to  year  8.  Legend 
KOPNHAIACAAWN€INAC€B.     Bust  r.  wearing  stephanc,  draped  (Fig.  17). 

Valerian  Jr.— Coins  in  years  4  and  5.  Legend  nAIKKOPOVAA€PIANOC- 
KAICC6B.  Bust  r.,  bareheaded,  wearing  cuirass  and  paludamentum  fastened 
across  chest  (Fig.  21):  slightly  varied  in  year  5  (Fig.  22). 

Saloninus. — Coins  in  years  5  to  8.  Legend  in  years  5  and  6  flOAI- 
KOPCAOVAA€PIANOCKC€B.       Bust    r.    bareheaded,    wearing    cuirass    and 


Tlie  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus.  153 

paludamentum,  turned  to  show  back  (Fig.  23) :  in  years  7  and  8  legend  altered  to 
CAVAA  and  bust  turned  to  front  with  paludamentum  fastened  across  chest 
(Fig.  24). 

4.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  changes  in  obverse  types  were  not  frequent,  and,  as 
far  as  the  legends  were  concerned,  were  of  very  slight  importance,  being  merely 
variations  in  spelling.  The  legends  of  Valerian  and  Gallienus  were  on  the  same 
scheme :  and  the  general  impression  produced  is  one  of  homogeneity.  There  is  a 
tendency,  especially  after  year  4,  in  the  cases  of  coins  of  Valerian  and  Salonina, 
and  more  rarely  those  of  Gallienus,  for  the  legend  to  be  interrupted  over  the  head  ; 
but  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  significance  in  this  fact. 

5.  The  same  impression  of  homogeneity  is  derived  from  a  study  of  the  reverse 
types.  Those  known  to  me  are  given  in  the  following  list :  the  letters  denote  the 
members  of  the  imperial  family  for  whom  the  types  were  used:  A.  =  Valerian, 
B.  =  Gallienus,  C  — Salonina,  D.  =  Valerian  jr.,  E.=  Saloninus  : — 

Year  \.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (A.  B.) :  Elpis  advancing  1.  (A.  B.) :  Homonoia 
standing  I.  (A.  B.) :  Nike  advancing  r.  (A.  B.) :  Tyche  reclining  1.  (A.  B.) : 
Alexandria  standing  1.  (A.  B.) :  Eagle  1.,  looking  back  (A.  B.). 

Year  2.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (A.):  Bust  of  Helios  r.  (A.):  Athene  seated  1. 
(A.  B.)  :  Eirene  standing  1.  (A.  B.)  :  Elpis  advancing  1.  (A.  B.) :  Homonoia  seated  1. 
(A.  B.)  :  Nike  standing  to  front  (A.) :  Bust  of  Sarapis  1.  (B.) :  Eagle  to  front,  wings 
open  (A.  B.). 

Year  3.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (A.  B.  C.) :  Athene  seated  1.  (A.  B.) :  Eirene 
standing  1.  (A.  B.  C.) :  Elpis  advancing  1.  (A.  B.  C.) :  Homonoia  seated  1.  (A.  B.  C.) : 
Nike  standing  to  front  (A.  B.  C.) :  Bust  of  Sarapis  1.  (A.  C.) ;  Eagle  to  front,  wings 
open  (A.  B.  C). 

Year  4  Bust  of  Helios  r.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Homonoia  standing  1.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) : 
Nike  advancing  r.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Tyche  seated  1.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Bust  of  Sarapis  1. 
(A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Eagle  1.,  looking  back  (A.  B.  C.  D.). 

Year  i^.  Zeus  seated  1.  (A.  C.  D.) :  Nike  seated  1.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Tyche 
standing  r.  (A.  B.  C.  D.) :  Bust  of  Sarapis  1.  (A.  C.  D.) :  Alexandria  with  head  of 
Sarapis  (A.  B.  C.  D.  E.) :  Eagle  1.,  looking  back  (A.  B.  C.  D.  E.). 

Year  6.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Nike  advancing  r.  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Bust 
of  Sarapis  1.  (A.  B.  E.) :  Alexandria  with  head  of  Sarapis  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Eagle  1., 
looking  back  (A.  B.  C.  E.). 

Year  7.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Athene  seated  I.  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Nike 
advancing  r.  (A.  B.  C.  E.)  :  Bust  of  Sarapis  1.  (E)  :  Busts  of  Sarapis  and  Isis  jugate  1. 
(E.):  Alexandria  with  head  of  Sarapis  (A.  B.  C.  E.) :  Eagle  1.,  looking  back 
(A.  B.  C.  E.). 

Year  8.  Bust  of  Helios  r.  (A.  E.)  :  Homonoia  standing  I.  (A.) :  Nike  standing 
to  front  (E) :  Eagle  1,  wings  open  (A.  B.  C.  E.). 

6.  It  is  evident  that  up  to  year  8  the  reverse  types  were  used  in  common  for 
all  those  in  whose  names  coins  were  being  issued  at  any  time :  there  are  a  few 
cases  where  a  type  does  not  occur  for  all  alike,  but  the  gaps  could  probably  be 
filled  by  a  further  .search  in  collections  :  the  chief  of  these  gaps  are  in  years  2  and  8, 
in  which  years  the  issues  were  comparatively  small  (see  §  12).  Further,  the  same 
reverse  types  were  often  continued  from  year  to  year :  this  is  notably  the  case  in 
years  2  and  3,  and  6  and  7. 


154  The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus. 

7.  At  some  point  in  year  8  a  fresh  style  of  obverse  legend  was  adopted  in  the 
case  of  Gallienus,  and  continued  to  the  end  of  his  reign,  in  the  form 
AVTKnAIKrAAAIHNOCC€B.  The  marked  contrast  between  the  practice  of 
the  mint  in  the  period  before  year  8,  and  that  in  the  period  after,  has  been 
mentioned  above  (§  2) :  it  will  be  set  forth  in  more  detail  in  the  following 
paragraphs. 

8.  The  obverse  type  of  Gallienus,  instead  of  remaining  practically  unchanged 
as  it  had  done  in  the  earlier  period,  was  varied  almost  annually  in  respect  of  the 
position  and  draping  of  the  bust ;  the  changes  are  : — 

Years  8-9.  Bust  in  front  view :  paludamentum  thown  back  to  show  cuirass 
(Figs.  7,  8.  9). 

Year  10.     Bust  in  front  view  :  paludamentum  fastened  over  chest  (Figs.  10,  11). 

Year  11.     Bust  in  back  view  (Fig.  12). 

Year  12.     Bust  in  front  view:  paludamentum  thrown  back  (Fig.  13). 

Year  13.     Bust  in  back  view  (Fig.  14). 

Year  14.     Bust  in  front  view  :  paludamentum  thrown  back  (Fig.  1 5). 

Year  15.     («)  As  year  14. 

(J))  Bust    in    front   view :    paludamentum    fastened    across    chest 
(Fig.  16). 

The  obverse  type  of  Salonina  is  less  varied :  the  issues  for  her  do  not 
recommence  after  year  8  till  year  11,  and  the  type  can  be  described  in  the  same 
terms  as  that  of  year  3  :  but  the  treatment  of  the  portrait  is  very  distinct  in  the 
later  period,  and  .shows  changes  from  time  to  time :  the  bust  is  always  more  spread 
than  in  years  3-8,  especially  in  years  1 1  and  12  (Fig.  18) :  in  year  13  a  neater  and 
more  compact  bust  is  found,  and  continues  with  slight  modification  to  the  end  of 
the  reign  (Figs.  19,  20). 

9.  As  regards  the  reverse  types,  in  contrast  to  the  homogeneity  before  year  8, 
there  are  only  two  instances  after  the  resumption  of  the  coinage  for  Salonina  of 
the  same  reverse  type  being  used  in  any  year  both  for  her  and  her  husband,  both  of 
these  in.stances  being  in  year  1 1.  F"urther,  after  year  9  it  hardly  ever  occurs  that 
the  same  reverse  type  is  used  in  two  successive  years  :  there  are  exceptions  in  the 
early  part  of  year  15,  when  the  change  in  the  reverse  types,  as  in  the  obverse  type, 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  made  till  some  time  after  the  beginning  of  the 
Alexandrian  year.  But,  generally,  the  mint  officials  seem  to  have  been  careful  to 
select  a  distinct  set  of  types  each  year.     A  list  of  the  types  is  given  below. 

10.  There  may  be  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  foregoing  considerations  the 
fact  that  the  fabric  of  the  coins  after  year  8  differs  rather  markedly  from  that  of 
the  earlier  issues :  the  flans  are  distinctly  thinner  and  more  spread.  The  execution 
of  the  dies,  too,  shows  a  change,  especially  in  the  treatment  of  the  portraits  on  the 
obverse  and  in  the  lettering. 

1 1.  From  the  internal  evidence  of  the  coins,  then,  there  seems  to  be  reason  to 
conclude  that  there  was  a  break  in  the  issues  of  Gallienus  during  his  year  8.  It 
follows  that  the  coins  of  Gallienus  of  his  years  8  and  9  should  be  examined  more 
closely,  to  see  how  they  can  be  fitted  in  with  the  facts  ascertainable  as  to  the 
interruption  of  his  recognition  in  Egypt  caused  through  the  usurpation  of  power 
by  Macrianus  and  Quietus. 

12.  Before  proceeding  further,  however,  it  will  be  useful  to  set  forth  some  data 
as  to  the  relative  sizes  of  the  issues  for  the  different  members  of  the  imperial  house 


The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus.  155 

up  to  and  including  year  8.    The  subjoined  figures  show  the  number  of  coins  found 
in  five  hoards  covering  the  period  which  I  have  examined  : — 


Year 
Valerian 

I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

48 

10 

302 

331 

166 

94 

198 

2 

Gallienus 

10 

6 

65 

72 

52 

26 

32 

31 

Salonina 

— 

— 

7 

52 

29 

13 

43 

3 

Valerian  jr. 

— 

— 

— 

S3 

16 

— 

— 

— 

Saloninus 

— 

— 

— 

— 

I 

5 

42 

— 

From  these  figures  it  appears  that  up  to  year  8  the  issues  for  Gallienus  were 
on  an  average  about  a  quarter  of  those  for  Valerian.  The  comparatively  small 
number  of  coins  of  Salonina  belonging  to  year  3  suggests  that  it  was  not  until  late 
in  that  year  that  the  mint  began  to  strike  for  her  :  after  this  year  her  coins  are 
usually  rather  fewer  than  those  of  Gallienus,  but  in  year  7  the  proportions  are 
reversed.  The  issues  for  Valerian  jr.  and  Saloninus  are  on  the  whole  rather  less 
than  those  for  their  mother. 

13.  In  year  8,  however,  the  coins  of  Gallienus  appear  in  far  greater  numbers 
than  those  of  the  others.  But  the  31  specimens  included  in  the  table  are  all  of  the 
later  obverse  type  described  in  |  8  :  there  is  not  amongst  them  a  single  example 
with  the  earlier  type  described  in  |  3.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  coins  of  Gallienus  of 
year  8  with  the  earlier  obverse  type  are  distinctly  rare :  I  have  only  seen  one 
specimen.  When  the  Alexandrian  mint  was  striking  concurrently  for  two  or  more 
members  of  the  imperial  house  it  normally  kept  the  same  proportions  of  issue  for 
each  from  year  to  year,  though  there  are  occasional  exceptions,  as  in  the  cases  of 
Gallienus  and  Salonina  in  year  7  :  and  it  is  improbable  that,  if  the  mint  proceeded 
on  the  same  lines  at  the  beginning  of  year  8,  when  Valerian  was  still  recognised,  as 
it  had  done  in  the  preceding  seven  years,  hoards  would  contain  more  coins  of 
Gallienus  than  of  Valerian.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  coins  of  Gallienus  of 
year  8  with  the  later  obverse  type  belong  to  a  period  in  the  year  when  the  mint 
was  striking  for  Gallienus  alone,  as  it  did  in  years  9  and  10. 

14.  The  reverse  types  used  for  coins  of  Gallienus  of  year  8  are,  with  the  earlier 
obverse,  only  Eagle  1.,  wings  open  :  with  the  later.  Head  of  Zeus  r. ;  Athene  .seated  1.; 
Nike  standing  to  front ;  Bust  of  Sarapis  1. ;  and  Flagle  1.,  wings  open.  Of  these,  the 
eagle  type,  which  is  found  with  both  obverses,  occurs  on  coins  of  Valerian,  Salonina, 
and  Saloninus  of  the  same  year:  the  Nike  type  is  shared  by  Saloninus:  the  other 
three  are,  so  far  as  1  know,  peculiar  to  Gallienus  in  this  year,  though  all  had  been 
employed  before  in  this  reign,  and  recur  on  coins  of  year  9. 

15.  The  issues  of  year  9  are  more  complicated.  The  date  on  the  reverse 
appears  in  three  forms — L  ©,  L  HA,  and  L  €NATOV.  The  last  of  these  three 
is  much  the  commonest :  four  hoards  .show  200  specimens,  as  against  i  of  L  ©  and 
2  of  L  HA.  It  is  the  usual  method  of  expressing  the  date  "year  9"  on 
Alexandrian  coins :  the  employment  of  0  as  a  numeral  was  often  avoided, 
apparently  on  superstitious  grounds,  and  HA  is  of  course  an  anomalous  form. 
The  relationship  of  the  three  series  requires  some  examination. 

16.  The  published  reverse  types  used  in  the  three  groups  are : — 

L0.  Athene  seated  1.  (F.  3058):  Asklepios  standing  1.  (B.M.  2174,  D.  5227): 
Dikaiosyne  standing  I.  (B.M.  2175):  Elpis  advancing  1.  (B.M.  2181):  Homonoia 
.standing  1.  (D.  5241):  Nike  advancing  r.  (F.  3057):  Tyche  standing  1.  (F".  3054): 
Tyche  seated  1. (P^  3055)  :  jugate  busts  of  Sarapis  and  Isis  r.  (D.  5263) :  Canopus  r. 
(B.M.  2214,  D.  5333,  5334):  Alexandria  with  bust  of  Sarapis  (D.  5225):  Eagle  r.. 


I  $6  Tlu  Alexaniirian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Galiienus. 

looking  back  (F.  3060):  Eagle  1.,  looking  back  (B.M.  2223,  D.  5278):  Kagle  1., 
wings  open,  looking  back  (B.M.  2224) :  Eagle  1.,  wings  open  (B.M.  2233). 

LHA.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (D.  5270) :  Nike  standing  to  front  (D.  5251) :  Eagle  1., 
palm  across  (D.  5287). 

L6NATOV.  Head  of  Zeus  r.  (B.M.  2153,  D.  5271) :  Athene  seated  1.  (B.M. 
2169,  D.  5230):  Nike  standing  to  front  (B.M.  2 191,  D.  5252):  Bust  of  Sarapis  1. 
(B.M.  2208,  D.  5260):  Eagle  1.,  palm  acro.ss  (B.M.  2235,  D.  5286):  trophy  with 
bound  captives  at  foot  (B.M.  2239,  D.  5274). 

[The  references  given  are  to  the  British  Museum  Catalogue  (B.M.)  and 
Dattari's  Numi  Impp.  Alexandrini  (D.),  with  a  few  types  in  Feuardent's  catalogue 
of  the  Demetrio  collection  (F.)  which  are  not  in  the  other  two.] 

The  obverse  types  are  as  described  above  (§  8) :  those  of  the  LHA  and 
L6NATOV  series  are  practically  indistinguishable  (Fig.  9) :  those  of  the  L0 
series,  however,  have  a  slight  difference  from  the  others  as  a  rule  in  showing  more 
of  the  paludamentum  on  the  shoulder  of  the  bust,  and  are  noticeably  worse  in 
execution  (Fig.  8). 

17.  It  is  clear  that  the  LHA  and  L6NATOV  series  are  closely  related:  in 
addition  to  the  similarity  of  the  obverse  type,  the  three  reverses  found  with  LHA 
ail  occur  also  with  L€NATOV.  Moreover,  these  two  series  appear  to  carry  on 
from  the  coins  of  year  8  with  the  later  obverse  type  :  of  the  five  reverse  types  of 
that  series  (see  §  14),  four  are  repeated  in  the  L€NATOV  group  and  two  in  the 
LHA  one:  the  remaining  type  of  year  8,  the  eagle  1.  with  wings  open,  which  is  the 
only  one  found  also  with  the  earlier  obverse  type  of  Galiienus  of  this  year,  is 
replaced  in  the  course  of  year  9  by  a  variant  position.  On  the  other  hand, 
amongst  the  numerous  reverse  types  of  the  L0  coins — remarkably  numerous 
considering  the  rarity  of  individual  specimens — only  Athene  and  the  eagle  with 
open  wings  are  common  to  coins  of  Galiienus  of  year  8,  and  only  Athene  to  those 
of  the  L6NATOV  group:  they  also  differ  in  respect  of  style  from  the  LHA  and 
L6NATOV  coins,  the  workmanship  being  inferior  both  on  the  obverses,  as  noted 
above,  and  on  the  reverses.  In  this  point  of  style  the  L0  coins  approach  closely 
to  .some  of  the  coins  of  year  10,  in  which  year  there  are  two  groups. 

18.  These  two  groups  are  broadly  distinguished  by  the  presence  or  absence  of 
a  palm  on  the  reverse,  the  types  being  : — 

Group  A.  Homonoia  standing  1.  (D.  5242):  Nike  advancing  r.  (D.  5255): 
Tyche  standing  1.  (D.  5266):  Bust  of  Isis  r.  (B.M.  2212):  Eagle  I.,  looking  back 
(B.M.  2225,  D.  5279). 

Group  B.  Homonoia  standing  1.,  palm  to  1.  (B.M.  2183,  D.  5243):  Nike 
advancing  r.,  palm  to  1.  (D.  5256):  Eagle  1.,  looking  back,  palm  to  1.  (B.M.  2226, 
D.  5280):  Wreath  enclosing  legend  A€KA  |  €THPI  |  CKV  |  PIOV  (B.M.  2240, 

D.  5273)- 

The  workmanship  of  group  A.  is  poor,  like  that  of  the  L0  coins  (Fig.  10)  : 
that  of  group  B.  is  much  better  (Fig.  1 1).  The  last  type  on  the  list  given  is  placed 
under  group  B.  on  account  of  its  style,  although  there  is  no  palm  in  the  field. 

19.  So  far  as  the  internal  evidence  shows,  the  succession  of  the  series  in 
years  8, 9,  and  10  would  seem  to  be  as  follows.  The  issues  of  year  8  with  the  later 
obverse  type  of  Galiienus  are  continued  in  year  9  by  the  LHA  and  L€NATOV 
groups  :  the  former  was  only  a  small  issue,  and  the  abnormal  form  of  the  date  may 
have  been  due  to  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  mint  officials  to  use  up  old  dies  with 
L  H  :  this  would  apply  at  any  rate  to  the  Zeus  and  Nike  types,  and  the  examples 


The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus.  i  57 

of  the  Zeus  type  which  I  have  seen  look  as  if  the  A  were  a  later  addition  to  the 
die:  it  would  not  however  hold  in  the  case  of  the  eagle  type,  which  is  not  found 
with  the  date  LH  :  but  some  specimens  of  this  type  clearly  have  HA  cut  over  © 
(Fig.  30);  and  perhaps  the  engravers,  who  had  begun  year  9  by  using  dies  of  LH 
altered  to  LHA,  brought  in  a  fresh  type  and  dated  it  L0  :  then,  their  attention 
being  called  to  the  superstitious  objection  to  this  form  of  date,  they  amended  it  in 
the  simplest  way  open  to  them  by  falling  back  on  the  anomalous  LHA :  but  in 
succeeding  issues  they  avoided  the  difficulty  by  writing  L€NATOV.  The  L0 
group  stands  quite  apart,  both  in  style  and  types  :  and  it  would  seem  reasonable  to 
regard  it  as  the  output  of  a  different  mint  from  the  LHA  and  LCNATOV  coins. 
It  is  true  that  there  is  no  evidence  to  prove  that  there  was  ever  any  other  mint 
than  that  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt  during  the  Roman  period  :  but  the  disturbed 
state  of  the  country  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  years  of  Gallienus  may  have  caused 
exceptional  arrangements.  Group  A.  of  year  10  would  appear  to  belong  to  the 
same  mint :  but  it  is  connected  in  types  with  Group  B.,  which  doubtless  began 
when  Gallienus  entered  upon  his  tenth  regnal  year,  two  or  three  months  after  the 
commencement  of  his  tenth  Alexandrian  year :  the  addition  of  the  palm  to  the 
reverse  types  was  a  recognised  method  of  marking  that  an  emperor  had  reached 
the  tenth  year  of  his  reign. 

20.  The  coins  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus,  during  their  recognition  in  Egypt, 
break  the  series  of  Gallienus.  They  are  all  dated  in  )'ear  i  (the  coin  in  the  British 
Museum,  published  as  of  year  2  of  the  elder  Macrianus,  is,  as  pointed  out  by 
Laffranchi  \^Riv.  Ital.  Numisiit.,  1907,  381]  a  tooled  coin  of  Gallienus)  and  are  of 
the  following  types,  which  occur  for  both  princes : — 

Homonoia  standing  1. :  Nike  standing  to  front :   ICaglc  1.,  wings  open. 

These  reverse  types  are  found  with  obverses  of  Valerian,  Gallienus  (earlier 
type)  or  Saloninus  of  year  8  :  and  the  two  latter  also  <jccur  on  coins  of  Gallienus 
with  the  later  obverse  type  of  year  8  and  continue  into  year  9.  So  far  as  the 
reverse  types  are  concerned,  therefore,  the  mint  officials  seem  merely  to  have 
transferred  to  Macrianus  and  Quietus  some  of  the  types  which  they  had  in  use 
already,  with  the  necessary  alteration  of  date :  and  the  coins  of  Macrianus  and 
Quietus  would  appear  to  come  naturally  after  those  of  Valerian  and  his  family,  and 
before  those  of  Gallienus  of  the  later  obverse  type  of  year  8.  The  style  of  the 
coins  (Figs.  45,  46  of  Macrianus  and  Figs.  47,  48  of  Quietus)  is  distinctly  that  of 
the  earlier,  not  of  the  later,  issues  of  year  8  of  Gallienus. 

21.  This  arrangement,  however,  does  not  quite  suit  some  of  the  evidence  from 
papyri  as  to  the  period  of  recognition  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus  in  Egypt.  The 
series  of  dates  in  P.  Strasb.  6-8  gives  these  two  emperors  as  recognised  on 
4  Phaophi,  i.e.,  1st  October,  260,  only  just  a  month  after  the  eighth  Alexandrian 
year  of  Gallienus  had  begun,  and  has  another  date  of  3  Hathyr  in  their  second 
year  (30th  October,  261),  the  first  reappearance  of  Gallienus  being  on  4  Pharmouthi 
of  his  year  9  (30th  March,  262).  For  the  writer  of  this  papyrus,  therefore, 
Gallienus  disappeared  for  over  a  year,  and  the  only  part  of  his  eighth  year  in  which 
he  would  be  recognised  in  Egypt  was  the  first  month.  But  the  dates  in  P.  Strasb.  6-8 
are  distinctly  confused,  and  perhaps  hardly  a  safe  guide :  the  recognition  of 
Macrianus  and  Quietus  in  Phaophi  of  their  first  year  is  confirmed  by  P.  Oxy.  1476, 
dated  2  Phaophi,  and  G.G.P.,  i,  50,  dated  27  Phaophi:  (the  still  earlier  date  of 
Thoth  I  of  the  first  year  in  P.  Flor.  273  is  probably  a  later  entr)') :  but  there  is  no 
other  example  besides   P.  Strasb.  6-8  of  a  date   in   the  second  year  of  the  two 


1 58  The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Galltenus. 

emperors,  and  a  Theban  ostracon  (Wilcken,  G.O.  1474)  is  dated  30  Mecheir  in  the 
eighth  year  of  Valerian  and  Gallienus,  which  suggests  that  in  the  spring  of  261 
Macrianus  and  Quietus  were  not  recognised  at  Thebes. 

22.  If  the  dates  of  P.  Strasb.  6-8  are  to  be  accepted,  an  explanation  of  the 
apparent  discrepancies  may  be  suggested.  The  evidence  of  the  coins  points  to  a 
small  i.ssue  of  Valerian  and  his  family  early  in  year  8,  and  a  more  extensive  issue 
for  Gallienus  alone  later  in  the  same  year,  with  .series  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus 
between.  Alexandria  and  its  mint  may  have  been  lost  by  Gallienus  by  the 
beginning  of  October,  260,  but  recovered  a  few  months  later,  before  his  ninth 
Alexandrian  year  commenced  on  29th  August,  261  :  the  Fayum  (from  which 
P.  Strasb.  6-8  comes)  may  have  still  been  held  for  Macrianus  and  Quietus  till  the 
autumn  of  261  :  while  the  Thebaid  may  either  never  have  been  conquered  by  the 
usurpers,  or  may  have  reverted  to  the  legitimate  emperor  at  an  earlier  date :  and 
in  this  case  the  LG  series  of  Gallienus  may  have  been  struck  in  the  Thebaid,  while 
regular  communication  with  Alexandria  was  interrupted  by  the  forces  of  Macrianus 
and  Quietus  in  Middle  Egypt  As  these  two  emperors  controlled  Egypt  from 
Syria,  it  would  be  quite  natural  that  their  strongest  hold  .should  be  in  the  ea.stern 
side  of  the  Delta  and  Middle  Egypt. 

23.  1  he  later  issues  of  Gallienus  and  Salonina  after  year  10  can  be  more 
summarily  treated.  In  year  1 1  there  are  a  few  coins  of  Gallienus  with  the  same 
obverse  type  as  that  of  year  10,  and  a  palm  in  the  field  of  the  reverse,  as  in  group  B. 
of  that  year:  the  reverse  types  found  are  Homonoia  standing  1.,  Sarapis  standing  1., 
and  eagle  1.,  looking  back.  But  far  the  greater  proportion  of  the  coins  of  this  year 
show  a  new  obverse  type,  with  the  emperor's  bust  in  back  view  ;  and  on  the  reverse 
of  these  coins  the  palm  does  not  appear.  Presumably  this  is  the  later  group,  and 
the  palm  may  have  been  dropped  after  the  end  of  the  tenth  regnal  year:  the 
renewal  of  the  issues  for  Salonina  may  have  been  contemporaneous  with  the 
adoption  of  the  new  obverse  for  Gallienus,  as  the  coins  of  Salonina  of  year  1 1  do 
not  bear  the  palm  on  the  reverse.  The  types  of  this  group  are :  for  Gallienus,  Bust 
of  Zeus  r. :  Bust  of  Helios  r. :  Ares  standing  before  trophj' :  Homonoia  seated  1.: 
Tyche  standing  1. :  Tyche  reclining  1. :  Sarapis  standing  between  Nike  and  the 
emperor :  Eagle  r.,  wings  open  ;  for  Salonina,  Dikaiosyne  seated  1. :  Homonoia 
seated  1. :  Tyche  reclining  1. 

24.  In  year  12  the  palm  reappears  on  the  reverses  of  all  coins,  both  of 
Gallienus  and  Salonina,  and  henceforward  is  regularly  used  till  the  end  of  the  reign, 
except  where  a  palm  forms  part  of  the  main  reverse  type,  as  for  instance  with 
figures  of  Nike  holding  a  palm  branch.  The  obverse  type  of  Gallienus  is  varied, 
the  bust  being  shown  in  front  view,  with  the  paludamentum  thrown  back  so  as  to 
expose  the  cuirass  on  the  emperor's  chest :  that  of  Salonina  is  practically  unaltered 
from  the  type  of  year  1 1.  The  reverse  types  are : — for  Gallienus,  Athene  standing 
to  front:  Homonoia  seated  1.:  Tyche  seated  1.:  Eagle  to  front,  with  wreath  on 
outspread  wings ;  for  Salonina,  Athene  seated  1. :  Eirene  standing  1. :  Elpis 
standmg  1.  As  noted  above  (§  9)  after  year  1 1  the  reverse  types  used  for  Gallienus 
and  Salonina  are  always  distinct :  in  year  12,  as  not  uncommonly  occurred  at 
Alexandria,  an  increase  in  the  total  output  of  the  mint  was  accompanied  by  a 
diminution  in  the  number  of  distinct  reverse  types  employed. 

25.  The  obverse  type  of  Gallienus  changed  back  in  year  13  to  the  later  one  of 
year  11,  in  regard  to  the  position  of  the  bust:  that  of  Salonina  was  altered  some- 
what in  details  of  treatment,  and  executed  in  better  style.  The  reverse  types  are 
still  few  in  number: — Eirene  standing  1.:  Homonoia  standing  1.:  Nike  standing  to 


J 


The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus.  i  59 

front :    Eagle    r.,    palm    across,    for    Gallienus ;     Dikaiosyne    standing    1. :     Nike 
advancing  r. :  Sarapis  seated  1. :  Eagle  1.,  looking  back,  for  Salonina. 

26.  Another  change  in  the  position  of  the  bust  on  the  obverse  of  coins  of 
Gallienus  was  mlWe  in  year  14,  reverting  to  the  scheme  of  year  12  :  the  portrait  of 
Salonina  is  hardly  varied  from  that  of  year  13.  The  reverse  types  found  are: — 
for  Gallienus,  Bust  of  Helios  r. ;  Bust  of  Selene  r.  ;  Athene  seated  1.,  with  shield  by 
throne;  Homonoia  standing  1.;  Nike  advancing  r. ;  Bust  of  Sarapis  r. ;  Eagle  1., 
looking  back  :  for  Salonina,  Elpis  standing  1. ;  Tyche  standing  1.  ;  Tyche  reclining  1. ; 
Bust  of  Isis  r. ;  Eagle  1.,  wings  open. 

27.  The  issues  of  year  1 5  began  with  the  same  obverse  types  as  those  of  the 
preceding  year,  but  in  the  course  of  the  year  the  type  of  Gallienus  was  changed  : 
the  bust  is  still  in  front  view,  but  with  the  paludamentum  fastened  across  the  chest. 
There  is  no  definite  alteration  in  the  type  of  Salonina.  The  reverse  types  of 
Gallienus  in  this  year  with  the  earlier  obverse  are  Poseidon  standing  1. ;  Bust  of 
Helios  r. ;  Bust  of  Selene  r. ;  Athene  seated  1.  on  cuirass  ;  Hermes  standing  1. ;  Two 
Nikae  to  front,  holding  shield  ;  Bust  of  Sarapis  r. ;  Horus  standing  1.,  with  child 
before  him  ;  Eagle  r.,  looking  back.  Half  of  these  types  are,  like  the  obverse, 
continued  from  year  14.  With  the  later  obverse  a  fresh  set  of  reverse  types  come 
in: — Nike  advancing  1.;  Canopus  r. ;  Eagle  1.,  looking  back;  Agathodaemon  r. 
The  reverse  types  of  Salonina  are  Dikaiosyne  standing  1. ;  Elpis  standing  1.  ; 
Tyche  standing  1. ;  Sarapis  seated  1. ;  Bust  of  Isis  I. ;  Bust  of  Nilus  and  Euthenia 
jugate  r. ;  Alexandria  standing  1. ;  Eagle  r.,  wings  open  ;  Eagle  1.,  palm  across.  As 
in  the  case  of  Gallienus,  some  of  these  reverse  types  are  continued  from  year  14 : 
and  probably  others  were  introduced  at  the  same  time  that  the  change  in  the  types 
of  Gallienus  took  place  :  but  it  is  not  possible,  on  the  evidence  at  present  obtainable, 
to  say  which  are  the  later  types. 

28.  It  is  worth  noting  that  there  is  a  very  marked  improvement  in  the  design 
and  execution  of  the  coins  of  the  last  two  years.  Until  year  8  there  is  a  dead  level 
of  mediocrity  in  the  work  of  the  mint,  which  had  been  degenerating  steadily  since 
the  reign  of  Severus  Alexander:  the  portraiture  is  uncertain,  the  types,  as  already 
mentioned,  monotonous,  and  the  legends  often  blundered.  Thus  of  year  i  I  have 
a  coin  of  Valerian  (Homonoia  rev.)  with  legend — OVAA6PANOC— ,  and  one  of 
Gallienus  (Alexandria  rev.)  with  — riAOVFAAA — :  of  year  3  coins  of  Valerian 
(Eirene,  Elpis,  and  eagle  revv.,  all  from  same  obv.  die)  with  — OVAA€PANOC — : 
of  year  4  two  (Homonoia  and  Nike  revv.,  same  obv.  die)  with  — OVAA€PI  ANC — , 
and  two  (Homonoia  and  eagle  revv.,  same  obv.  die)  with  — VOAA6PIANOC — : 
of  year  5  one  (Alexandria  rev.)  with  — flAOVAA —  :  of  year  7  one  (eagle  rev.) 
with  the  same  mistake,  and  coins  of  Saloninus  witli  FIOIKOP —  (Alexandria  rev.), 
— OVAA6PANOC—  (Alexandria  rev.),  and  — N06KC6B  (Zeus,  Nike,  Sarapis, 
Alexandria,  and  eagle  revv.).  After  year  8  there  do  not  seem  to  be  any  more 
blundered  legends,  and  some  of  the  issues  show  better  work,  though  side  by  side 
with  them  there  are  very  poor  examples  (see  §  17).  From  year  12  onwards  the 
improvement  in  style  is  consistent,  and  by  year  14  the  mint  had  reached  a  higher 
artistic  level  than  had  been  known  for  many  years:  in  the  next  year  the  authorities 
evidently  determined  to  abandon  the  old  monotonous  rotation  of  reverse  types, 
and,  besides  reviving  some  which  had  been  unused  for  a  century  (Canopus  and 
Agathodaemon),  and  in  addition  modifying  the  attributes  of  such  revivals  (Poseidon 
and  Hermes),  they  introduced  two  entirely  novel  types — the  two  Nikae  holding  a 
shield  and  Hrjrus  with  a  child. 


i6o  The  Alexandrian  Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus. 

29.  The  following  table  gives  the  numbers  of  coins  of  Gallienus  and  Salonina 
from  year  9  onwards  in  four  hoards  (one  of  those  used  for  the  table  of  the  earlier 
years  having  been  completed  about  year  12  is  excluded): — 


Gallienus. 

Salonii 

Year  9  LG 

I 

— 

LHA 

2 

— 

L6NATOV 

200 

— 

,    10  without  palm 

3 

— 

with           „ 

IIS 

— 

'  I      » 

1 

— 

without     „ 

146 

67 

,,   12 

191 

180 

..  13 

307 

284 

,,  14 

396 

528 

„  1 5  earlier  type 
later 

464 
103 

- 

322 

Note. — A  document  published  in  Vol.  XII  of  the  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri 
(No.  141 1)  contains  a  proclamation  of  some  interest  in  connexion  with  the  coinage 
of  this  period.  It  is  an  order  by  a  strategus,  who  is  known  from  other  evidence  to 
have  held  office  during  the  rule  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus,  directing  the  money- 
changers to  accept  and  exchange  "  the  sacred  coin  of  the  emperors,"  which  they 
were  accused  of  having  refused  to  take.  The  date  of  the  order  is  unfortunately 
uncertain,  owing  to  the  breakage  of  the  papyrus  :  but  it  is  probably  28  Hathyr  in 
the  first  year,  i.e.,  24th  November,  260,  less  than  two  months  after  the  earliest 
certain  date  of  the  two  emperors.  The  reason  for  the  unwillingness  of  the  money- 
changers to  accept  this  coinage  is  a  matter  for  conjecture :  the  most  probable 
explanation  would  seem  to  be  that  they  were  doubtful  of  the  right  of  Macrianus 
and  Quietus  to  issue  coins :  and  if,  as  suggested  above,  some  part  of  Egypt  was 
still  held  for  Gallienus,  they  would  have  some  justification  in  desiring  to  suspend 
what  might  be  taken  as  a  recognition  of  the  usurpers.  The  mere  fact  that  new 
effigies  and  titles  appeared  on  the  coins  would  hardly  have  troubled  them,  if  they 
had  been  assured  of  tlie  due  authority  of  the  new  emperors  :  in  the  fifteen  years 
before  260  there  had  been  fifteen  emperors,  empresses,  or  Caesars  represented  on 
Alexandrian  coins.  The  standard  of  the  issues  of  Macrianus  and  Quietus  also 
was  not  noticeably  varied  from  that  of  their  immediate  predecessors :  so  the 
changers  would  not  have  feared  loss  on  depreciation.  On  the  whole,  the  political 
motive  seems  the  best  explanation  of  this  proclamation. 

Description  of  Plates. 

The  first  Plate  has  been  arranged  to  show  the  obverse  types  of  Valerian  (1-4), 
Gallienus  (5-16),  Salonina  (17-20),  Valerian  junior  (21,  22),  and  Saloninus  (23,  24', 
in  the  succession  explained  above. 

The  second  Plate  is  intended  to  illustrate  the  variations  in  style  of  the  reverse 
types  of  Gallienus  :  of  the  coins  figured,  25-28  are  examples  of  the  ordinary  types 
before  year  8:  29-32  belong  to  the  transitional  period  of  years  9  and  10:  and 
33-40  show  the  improvement  of  the  last  five  years  of  the  reign,  especially  37-40, 
which  are  all  of  year  15  :  to  these  are  added,  in  41-44  four  reverses  of  coins  of 
Salonina  of  year  14,  to  give  further  evidence  of  the  artistic  merit  of  the  year.     For 


Alexandrian    Coins    of  Gallienus   and   Family 


Alexandrian    Coins    of  Gallienus  and  Family. 


I*-' 


The  Alexandrian   Coinage  of  the  Eighth  Year  of  Gallienus. 


i6i 


purposes  of  comparison  with  the  series  of  Gallienus,  45  and  46  suppi}'  obverse  and 
reverse  types  of  Macrianus,  and  47  and  48  of  Quietus. 
The  illustrations  are  from  coins  in  my  collection. 

♦  J.  G.  Milne. 

List  of  Illustrations. 


(Ob 

verse  types.) 
Year. 

I. 

Valerian 

I. 

2S 

2. 

») 

2-5- 

26. 

3- 

,, 

6-8. 

37. 

4- 

»» 

7  (abnornjal). 

28. 

S- 

Gallienus 

■-5- 

29. 

6. 

>. 

5-8. 

30. 

7- 

i» 

8  (later  type). 

3». 

32- 

8. 

.. 

9  (date  0). 

9- 

» 

9(date€NATOV). 

33- 

10. 

»» 

10  (group  .\.). 

34. 

II. 

}i 

10  (group  B.). 

35. 

12. 

»» 

II. 

36. 

*3* 

i» 

12. 

37- 

'4- 

>. 

13. 

38. 

'5- 

i» 

14-15- 

39 

16. 

»» 

15  (later  type). 

40. 

17- 

Salonina 

3-8. 

41. 

18. 

,, 

11-12. 

42. 

>9 

ff 

»3- 

43- 

20. 

„ 

14-15. 

44- 

21. 

Valerian  jr. 

4. 

45. 

22. 

,, 

5- 

46. 

23- 

Saloninus 

5-6.                                  ' 

47. 

24- 

»» 

7-8. 

48. 

(Reverse  types.) 


Vear. 
I. 


(Gallienus)  Elpis  standing  1. 

,,  Head  of  Zeus  r.  3. 

,,  Homonoia  standing  1.  4. 

,,  Nike  advancing  r.  6. 

_,,  Eagle  1„  looking  back  9  (0). 

„  Eagle  1. ,  palm  across  9  (HA). 

Bust  of  Sarapis  1.  9  (€NATOV). 

„  Nike  advancing  r.  10  (group  B.). 

,,  Eagle  r. ,  wings  open  11. 

„  Athene  standing  12. 

„  Eirene  standing  1.  13 

,,  Nike  advancing  r.  14 

,,  Poseidon  standing  1.  15 

„  Bust  of  Selene  r.  15 

„  Athene  seated  1.  on  cuirass    15 

,,  Horus  and  child  15 

(Salonina)  Elpis  standing  1.  14 

,,  Tyche  reclining  1.  14 

,,  Bust  of  Isis  r.  14, 

„  Eagle  1.,  wings  open  14 

(Macrianus)  Obverse  type  i 

,,  Homonoia  standing  1.  i 

(Quietus)  Obverse  tyix-  i 

,,  Eagle  1.,  wings  o[)en.  i 


(       I62      ) 


\ 

EARLY  HIEROGLYPHIC  READINGS  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  CELL. 

The  following  documents  were  presented  by  the  late  Miss  Sharpe,  of  Highbury, 
to  the  Edwards  Library,  University  College,  London,  and  they  are  here  published 
at  the  suggestion  of  Prof  Breasted.  As  one  document  dates  from  ist  January,  1822, 
it  is  of  some  importance  as  showing  the  state  of  the  subject  before  the  influence  of 
Champollion.  Other  letters  of  various  students  to  Gell  that  have  appeared  in 
the  lournal  of  Egyptian  Archaeology  are  of  1826- 1829,  and  therefore  after 
Champollion's  work  was  known. 

The  first  document  is  on  a  four-page  sheet  of  note  paper,  8  inches  by  5  inches. 
The  page  i  blank,  page  2  on  Rosetta  Stone,  page  3  cartouches,  page  4  the  end  of 
a  letter  of  Sir  William  Gell  to  "  Dear  Barone."  The  only  Baron  about  in  that 
company  seems  to  have  been  Baron  Uxkhull,  who  was  interested  in  translation 
{J.E.A.,  191 5,  p.  83),  and  later  accompanied  Champollion  (J.E.A.,  p.  84).  That 
this  portion  of  a  letter  accompanies  Document  2,  which  has  scribbled  notes  by 
Gell,  rather  suggests  that  it  was  held  back  by  him  and  never  sent.  The  sheet  is 
now  split  down  the  fold,  but  the  watermark  shows  the  original  union. 

On  page  2  Gel!  makes  a  bold  attempt  to  equate  two  lines  of  the  Rosetta  Stone. 
He  evidently  split  up  the  text  by  guess,  without  knowing  the  values  of  most  of 
the  signs,  and  much  of  the  rendering  is  wrong;  but  he  could  read  the  whole 
cartouche  of  Ptolemy  safely.  On  page  3  Gell  gives  two  dozen  cartouches,  mostly 
wrong  ;  the  first  two  are  obtained  from  the  obelisk.  Of  the  rest  Memnon,  .-^  menses 
and  Ptolem)'  are  about  all  that  will  pass  muster. 

On  page  4  Gell  is  entreating  the  Baron  to  get  material  in  Rome  and  send  it 
on  to  Naples  for  study.  These  attempts  show  how  very  far  Gell  was  from  any  real 
grasp  of  the  subject. 

For  the  sake  of  clearness  each  page  of  original  manuscript  is  here  given  as  a 
separate  page  of  print,  quoted  entire  without  any  additions  on  pp.  163-5. 


Early  Hieroglyphic  Readings  of  Sir   William  Cell.  163 

[Page  2]  End  of  the  Rosetta  Stone.       Line  14.) 

c  n 
to  prepare  a  pillar  of  hard   stone  with  wrought    letters     proper     for  the  gods    of 


- a 


nPl^m      lu      S  S  2!     ^ 


the  country    lastly  .  .  .  Greek.     The  priesthood    declare    it    in  order  to  set  it  up 

l\     PPP        ^     ra^     <a.    °°N  °^    °°s      ^=^  ^ 

jFvi-     nnn           111       ©  c3i       m}       1         11         111          .=  1  b 

in   temples  of  all  kinds  in  Egypt    in  all    first  second  third  wheresoever  wrought 

the  image      of      the  kine            ^  ^^^  e  e  os  immortal  beloved  of  Phthah  the  god 

^                    T     M  A  '^ 

Epiphanes     Eucharistes. 
(Line  6.) 

lawfully     ordained     moreover     to  set  up     wrought     another    statue   of  the  king 


loved  of  Phthah    the 

GSM!] 


p    o       L     E  E  OS  inimortal  beloved  of  Phthah    the  god    Epiphanes    Eucharistes 


TO  MA 

called  by    the  name  immortal  ptolomaeeosh 


No.  I.     End  of  the  Rosetta  inscription. 

"  This  decree  shall  be  inscribed  on  a  prepared  column  of  hard  stone,  in  the 
sacred,  the  vernacular,  and  in  the  Greek  character,  and  be  placed  in  each  temple 
both  of  the  first,  second  and  third  (gods)  wherever  the  wrought  image  of  the  king 
Ptolomy  the  immortal,  beloved  of  Phthah  the  god  Epiphanus  Eucharistes  .  .  .  ." 

ZTEPEOY  AI0OY  TOIZ  TE  lEPOIZ  KAI  ErXIlPIOIZ  KAI 
EAAHNIKOIZ  TPAMMAZIN  KAI  ZTHZAI  EN  EKAZTI2  TflN  TE 
nPHTflN   KAI   AEYTEPHN   .  .  .  ."  caetera  desunt. 

No.  2. 

"  It  is,  moreover,  lawfully  ordained  that  another  wrought  statue  of  the  king 
Ptolomaios  the  immortal  the  beloved  of  Pthah  the  god  Epiphanes  Eucharistes 
shall  be  set  up,  and  called  by  the  immortal  name  of  Ptolomaios." 

Specimens  of  the  Trilinguar  inscription  of  Rosetta  which  has  served  as  the 
dictionary  of  Hieroglyphics.  It  is  published  by  the  A.S.S.  of  London,  and  an 
impression  in  plaster  was  sent  to  Rome,  where  it  is  probably  carefully  hidden  from 
antiquaries  in  the  most  .secret  of  prisons — a  public  library. 

L    2 


164  Early  Hieroglyphic  Readings  of  Sir   William  GeU. 

[i'age  3] 
Thuthmosis.  i^ 


Tholh 

name. 


CHDs 

Mesphres. 

Misphragmuthosis. 

Tithous. 

Eoa. 

QZID 

Memnon. 
A  menses. 


Scarab. 
The  Sun. 


Heron. 


Ramesses. 


Re  =  The  Sun. 


c 


Vl  Mesh  =  offspring, 

y*y        14         I  **^  which  the  .scarab 

jnj        I I         1         is  the  syrnlwl. 

v^ /\  Shesh  =  a  pair,  or 


Sesostris. 


C°PkSl 


Pheron. 


czn:] 


c 


Proteus. 


Amarnuphthes. 


Anysis. 


Psammeticus. 


c 


:] 


QiUj 


Nechao. 


r^ 

0  T 

a 

*-* 

11 

^i 

E 

u 

n. 

□ 

V    J 

o 


^u^ 


:] 


Psammis. 


c 


:] 


Maenuphtes. 


\.  I  S!i         /WVWv         _^ 


7"^ 


Amasis. 


r^qit"! 


Ptolemy,  vid.  Rosetta. 


CMiK] 


Berenice. 


Early  Hieroglyphic  Readings  of  Sir   William  Gell.  165 


[Page  4] 

In  the  Rosetta  inscription  the  Greeks  are  called  not  Ellenes  but  lonians,  thus 
OUEEININ  X  =  ou,  ||(1  =  EE,   ^^  =  a  serpent,  or  ENEH,  ^  N. 

Arsinoe  is  probably  made  out  of  (2,  arshin  =  a  lentil. 

I  wish  you  could  go  into  some  cellar  or  to  the  foundation  of  some  house  near 
San  Lorenzo,  in  Lucina,  and  get  the  names  [J  [  1  upon  the  obelise,  of  which  I  am  in 
great  want — the  obelise  of  the  Campus  Martius  I  mean.  The  Sallustian  obelise, 
though  in  part   copied,  has  in  one  of  the  phylacteries  or  [J  the  throne  of  Osiris 

reversed,  which  shows  it  is  false,  thus  N. 

Fray  find  out  what  is  O"  a  vase  in  Coptic,  ancient  or  modern.  I  had  mislaid 
this  when  Mr.  Westmacott  went  to  Rome.  I  have  now  got  for  you  my  work  on 
the  Troad — as  to  La  Croze  I  have  .sent  to  London  for  it,  as  I  can  go  on  no  longer 
without  it. 

There  is  another  stone  at  Leghorn  (Livorno)  belonging  to  the  great  Drouetti, 
pray  pray  do  what  you  can  to  get  a  copy  of  it ;  it  has  the  Greek,  Coptic,  and 
hieroglyphic  also  as  I  understand.  Have  you  no  correspondent  who  would  contrive 
this,  or  even  a  part  of  it,  for  love  or  money — Pray  try.  I  will  bring  the  Rosette 
inscription  with  me  and  the  translations  from  the  Greek  and  from  the  Egyptian — 
You  will  do  much  if  you  can  get  this  copied  at  Livorno.  I  send  this  by  Mr.  Page 
from  Constantinople  whom  I  hereby  present  to  you  and  beg  you  to  patronise. 

Ever,  Dear  Barone,  yours, 

William  Gell. 
Naples, /fl».  i.f/,  1822. 


I-  3 


l66  Early  Hieroglyphic  Readings  of  Sir  William  Gell. 


The  second  document,  7'5  inches  b\'  7.9  inches,  thin  paper,  is  the  cover  of  a 
letter  in  the  handwriting  of  Seyffarth. 

"  Al  Chiarissimo  Signore, 

II  Signor  Professore  Nibby, 

Via  di  Ripetta  No.  210, 

Roma." 


Postmarks  :  "  22  (IKNN Al  "  "  CHAMBERY  "  and  a  partly  illegible  one,  " ....  DA 
OVA.'"      "  C.  F.  4.  K." 

On  the  inside  of  the  sheet,  memoranda  in  the  handwriting  of  Gell  as  follow  : — 


I,      ,,    h     ^     appartenente  a  Sate   per    —  ^ ,  n=n  oik  pane,  fssi^  aurea, 


-"  * 

[|||l  dominatore,  t^^is   regione,  wv^^a   Mente   inferno,   v-'^^    Terra   lavorata, 


O  <=> 


et   caetera,  8  O  8   et   caetera,    (  .  j     Nectanebus,    HI  

{■wolfs  /tead)  \^ 

ostes  nato ,  ^v.  Aroeris,  ?t^  Macedo,  F=g   K  non  e  certo  ma  c  piu 


cheP=^,   ^^.    A  non  e  un  K,  T  quando  non  ce  un  aaaaaa  ,   m  Dominus 

D'^norum,   1^  f=5   P.  H.,  '^  Anima  plurale,    ^  ,  '^='  great,  ^,  (j  ^  ^ 
Amset.     Dresser  cholchytes  Hierostolites. 

Apparently  Seyffarth  wrote  from  Chambery  to  Nibby  at  Rome.  The  letter 
was  probably  sent  on  to  Gell,  who  used  the  cover  for  .scribbling  notes  on  hiero- 
glyphs in  the  same  fashion  as  he  did  on  the  sheet  published  in  J.E.A.,  191 5, 
PI.  XVII.  Both  the  sheets  of  note.s  are  clearly  in  Gell's  writing.  Unfortunatelj- 
there  is  no  date  to  these  notes.  Most  of  them  are  fairly  correct,  which  suggests 
that  they  are  rather  later  than  the  attempts  on  the  Rosetta  stone. 

W.  M.  F.  P. 


(      i67     ) 


SCULPTURE    OF    PTOLEMY   L 

The  sculptured  slabs  of  Ptolemy  I  (now  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford) 
were  found  in  1894  in  the  temple  of  Koptos.  They  form  part  of  an  intercolumnar 
screen  "  between  the  eastern  pair  of  columns,  north  of  the  Isis  steps."  They  were 
described  by  Prof.  Petrie  {Koptos,  p.  19),  and  the  "Khonsu"  standard  was  figured 
by  Dr.  Seligman  and  myself  in  Man,  XL  P-  166.  Beyond  this  the  sculpture  has 
received  no  attention. 

The  scene  represents  the  deified  king,  or  his  statue,  standing  in  front  of  a 
rectangular  object.  He  wears  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  holds  a  plain  staff  in 
his  left  hand.  The  rectangle  is  decorated  on  the  top  and  along  the  right  side  with 
a  border  of  ^/r^^^y-ornaments,  giving  the  appearance  of  the  gates  depicted  in  the 
Book  of  Gates.  As  the  klieker  represents  the  heads  of  papyrus  above  the  top  of  a 
mud  wall,  it  seems  likely  that  this  rectangular  object  is  not  a  building  but  an 
enclosure,  in  all  probability  a  sacred  enclosure.  Within  the  rectangle  is  a  doorway 
acro.ss  which  a  curtain  is  hung,  pulled  diagonally  to  one  side.  Above  the  king's 
head  is  the  disk  of  the  sun,  with  a  uraeus  hanging  from  each  side.  An  awM-sign 
is  slung  round  the  neck  of  each  snake,  and  hangs  low,  so  as  to  enclose  a  space  in 
which  is  the  word  ^,   Behdet'i,  "  He  of  Edfu."     In  front  of  the  king  and 

facing  him  stands  a  small  figure  of  the  Anmutef  priest,  making  an  offering  of 
incense  with  the  right  hand,  and  raising  the  left  in  the  attitude  of  adoration.  He 
wears  the  traditional  costume  of  the  Anmutef  priest ;  the  hair  arranged  in  the 
long  side-lock  of  youth,  and  a  leopard-skin  with  the  tail  hanging  down,  covers  the 
front  of  the  body  and  the  rest  of  the  clothing.  Before  the  king  and  behind  the 
Anmutef  are  six  standards,  alternately  high  and  low  :  they  are  placed  in  the  following 
order: — (i)  Ibis,  (2)  defaced,  (3)  Hawk,  (4)  "Khonsu,"  (5)  Upuaut  with  .snake 
and  ostrich  feather,  (6)  Emblem  of  Min  surmounted  by  two  upright  plumes.  The)' 
face  the  same  way  as  the  king,  and  in  early  representations  of  a  similar  scene  are 
carried  by  human  or  emblematic  figures.  In  this  example,  however,  the  standards 
are  .stationary.  Placing  the  standards  is  the  figure  of  a  woman  standing.  Her 
headdress  consists  of  a  long  curled  wig,  partially  covered  by  a  vulture  and  sur- 
mounted by  a  low  circular  crown,  from  which  rise  two  horns  with  a  disk  between  ; 
in  her  right  hand  she  holds  a  papyrus  .sceptre,  in  her  left  an  mikli. 

L  4 


1 68  Sailpture  of  Ptolemy  J. 

Inscnptions. — In  front  of  and  rather   above   the   king,   three   vertical    lines 
(i)  illegible,  (2)  "  King  of  the  South  and  North,  Lord  of  the  Two  Lands, 
beloved  of  Amon,  chosen  of  Ra,  (3)  Son  of  the  Sun,  Lord  of  Diadems, 

Ptlum[ys]."  .  <::^ 

Above  the  head  of  the  Anmutef  priest,  one  horizontal  line,  which  I  t]  ,^g^ 

suggest  may  be  translated  :  "  That  which  is  given  as  an  offering  by  the  <=> 

king."     There  is  only  one  a  visible,  but  there  is  room  above  for  a  CTD 1 

horizontal  sign  of  that  size.     The  bird  must  be  ^\    as  there  is  no  back-       p;  f 

claw.  The  rectangular  sign  appears  to  be  D,  and  I  suggest  that  the 
lost  sign  above  may  be  =S=,  of  which  D  would  be  the  phonetic 
complement. 

Between   the   king   and    the    Anmutef    priest,   one   vertical    line : 


m 


.i 


"Making  fire  .  .."     The  end  of  the  inscription  may  be    []  (]      o,  as  in 

Mariette,  Abydos,  I,  PI.  43  ;  the  usual  termination  of  the  inscription  is 

^    '  T  (see  Mariette,  Abydos,  I,  PI.  24  i).  ^  ] } 

Between  the  standards  and  the  goddess,  one  vertical  line :  "  Isis,  the         "^ 
great  one,  Mistress  of  all  the  Gods."     In  the  similar  scene  at  Abydos  the 


i, 


goddess  holds  a  sistrum,  with  an  inscription :  "  Playing  {_yrt)  the  sistrum."  U    |  1 

Above  the  head  of  the  goddess  are  a  few   signs   which,  though      ("18^ 
perfectly  legible,  cannot  be  translated  without  the  context.  ID  a  i 

Behind  the  goddess,  one  vertical  line :  "  Come  then  to  the  temple.         "■ 

Khnum,  lord  of  the  temple,  is  in  rejoicing.     The  Great  Ennead,  who  are      -ir^  T 
in  the  House,  are  in  rejoicing." 

See  transcription  here. 

Beyond  the  inscription  to  the  right  is  a  vertical  ornamental  border  of  rectangles 
of  the  usual  type. 

M.  A.  Murray. 


Sculpture  of  Ptoleviy  I. 


169 


■2. 
O 


5 

6. 


c 


?-. 


(     '70     ) 


REVIEWS. 


"  Emperor  " -ivorship  in  Egypt. — S.  A.  B.  Mercer.  {Journal  of  the  Satiety  of 
Oriental  Research,  CKxcdigo,  \gi7).     8vo.     9  pp. 

The  evidence  of  worship  of  the  king  during  his  life  is  here  described  from  the 
various  sources.  The  first  is  a  stele  of  adoration  of  Aohmes  I,  Nefertari  onkhti,  or 
living,  and  Amenhetep  I.  As  the  queen  was  living,  her  son  was  presumably  alive 
at  this  adoration.  Yet  this  is  by  no  means  certain  :  she  was  born  about  1613  B.C., 
and  Amenhetep  I  died  1 541,  when  his  mother  was  72,  if  she  survived.  So  it  is 
not  at  all  impossible  that  she  might  be  living  when  both  husband  and  son  were 
deified  as  dead.  Conclusions  from  epithets  must  be  very  carefully  dealt  with ;  at 
Gurob  many  steles  of  the  adoration  of  Tehutmes  III  show  the  king  with  the 
epithets  usual  during  life  {neb  taui,  neb  khou,  da  onkh  ma  ra  zetta) ;  and  yet  the 
names  of  the  adorers,  taken  from  Ramessu  II,  show  that  Tehutmes  was  dead 
centuries  before.  This  much  must  be  said  in  caution,  without  denying  the 
adoration  of  the  living  king. 

Another  point  must  also  be  observed  in  the  enquiry ;  the  king  at  the  sed 
festival  became  identified  with  Osiris,  and  would  then  naturally  be  worshipped,  but 
is  he  adored  as  king  before  his  Osirification  ?  The  instances  of  adoration  of  the 
king  under  Amenemhot  III,  Merenra,  and  Ramessu  II,  may  all  be  after  Osirifi- 
cation. The  inhabitants  of  Niy  adoring  Amenhetep  II  in  his  first  year  are 
Mesopotamians  propitiating  a  conqueror.  The  Ethiopians  at  Kubban  may  worship, 
but  they  are  not  Egyptians. 

The  best  evidence  of  worship  of  the  king  is  in  the  Harris  Papyrus,  where 
Ramessu  IV  puts  in  the  mouth  of  his  father  the  injunction  to  the  people  to  bow  to 
him,  serve  him  always,  adore  him,  implore  him,  magnify  his  goodness  as  they  do  to 
Ra.  This  must  appl)'  to  the  king  at  his  accession,  and  before  Osirification.  The 
divine  descent  of  the  kings,  as  sons  of  Ra  in  the  Vth  dynasty  and  sons  of  Amen  in 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  would  be  naturally  a  basis  for  worship.  Thus  we  maj- 
accept  the  thesis  of  Dr.  Mercer,  although  much  of  the  evidence  which  he  adduces 
may  not  really  support  the  worship  of  the  king  before  Osirification. 

Some  useful  cautions  are  given  against  attributing  all  our  ideas  of  a  deity  to 
the  word  neter  in  Egyptian.  This  would  be  an  anachronism  like  supposing  that 
the  Greek  intended  by  tluos  all  that  we  mean  by  "  God."  Both  to  the  Egyptian 
and  the  Greek  the  gods  were  not  far  removed  from  men  in  time  or  in  powers,  the\' 
might  die  and  be  buried,  and  they  were  all  subject  to  Fate  like  men. 

Bas-reliefs  from  the  Egyptian  Delta.  {Bulletin  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum 
of  Art,  March,  191 7.) 

These  are  two  trial  pieces,  about   10  inches  by  8^  inches,  of  rather  peculiar 

work,  one  of  a  king's  head,  the  other  of  title.s.      From  the  combination  of  the 


Reviezus.  1 7 1 

titles  nesut  bati,  vulture  and  uraeus,  which  was  usual  in  the  earliest  dynasties 
and  disappeared  after  the  Vlth,  and  from  the  style  of  the  su  sign,  Mr.  VVinlock 
<:oncludes  that  these  may  belong  to  a  very  early  date.  The  king's  head  is  peculiar 
for  the  striation  "■•f  the  whole  crown  of  Lower  Egypt,  from  top  to  bottom,  a  type 
not  known  elsewhere.  The  false  beard  is  not  only  ribbed  across,  but  striated  with 
hair  lines  wavy  all  the  length.  This  is  a  peculiar  feature  only  known  in  the  Old 
Kingdom  ;  in  late  times  the  beard  is  merely  smooth.  The  line  of  eye  paint 
extends  backward  to  the  crown,  which  is  also  early  detail,  seen  on  the  figure  of 
Khosekhem  in  the  Ilnd  dynasty.  We  would  go  a  step  further  than  Mr.  Winlock, 
and  say  that  the  face,  especially  the  nose,  is  so  closely  like  that  of  Sa-nekht  at 
Maghara,  that  it  is  probable  that  the  work  is  of  the  Ilird  dynasty,  perhaps  of  that 
king.  The  pieces  are  stated  to  have  come  from  the  Delta ;  this  cannot  mean  far 
north,  as  all  the  early  levels  of  the  northern  Delta  are  under  water.  Heliopolis 
would  be  the  most  likely  source,  especially  as  sculpture  of  Neterkhet  was  found 
there  by  Schiaparelli.  New  York  is  fortunate  in  getting  pieces  of  such  rare  early 
sculpture. 

The  Egyptian  Expedition,  1915-16.  {Bull.  Metrop.  Mus.,  May,  1917.) 
This  is  a  record  of  the  excellent  systematic  clearance  at  Thebes  carried  on  under 
Dr.  Lythgoe's  direction.  At  the  beginning  of  the  long  causeways  leading  to  the 
temples  of  Deir  el-Bahri,  the  courtyard  of  a  large  tomb  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  has 
been  cleared,  having  a  colonnade  along  the  side  in  which  is  the  tomb  entrance. 
Many  other  burials  were  cut  in  the  rock  along  the  sides  and  in  the  floor  of  the  court. 
At  the  top  of  the  filling  were  Ptolemaic  tombs  dated  to  Cleopatra  II  by  a  coin. 
Below  these  some  large  beads  of  Sheshenq  "and  numerous  pottery  figurines  and  vases 
an  the  form  of  horsemen  and  cocks."  These  will  be  important  as  dating  other  pottery 
.figures,  and  the  cocks  must  be  the  earliest  e.xamples  in  the  West,  pointing  to  their 
having  been  introduced  by  the  Bubastite  dynasty  from  Persia.  A  little  lower  was  a 
foundation  deposit  of  Ramessu  IV,  for  a  building  of  which  only  two  column  bases 
•were  left.  Further  down  were  traces  of  the  lower  temple  of  Hatshepsut  at  the  foot 
<A  the  cau.seway.  It  seemed  that  only  the  foundation  deposits  were  laid  down,  and 
the  south  side  of  this  temple  had  never  been  begun.  This  was  over  a  mass  of 
•chips  which  filled  the  sunken  square  court  of  a  large  Middle  Kingdom  tomb.  This 
appeared  to  be  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Xllth  dynasty.  Many  tombs  of  the  family 
and  household  had  been  cut  in  the  sides  of  the  court;  and  early  in  the  XVI 1 1th 
•dynasty,  pits  had  been  sunk  for  burials,  and  little  shrines  built  above  them.  Such 
are  very  rarely  found  preserved,  as  at  Hav\ara  (./?w«a« /-"or/zw/^j,  XVII,  XVIII). 
In  one  of  these  early  burials  is  a  very  unusual  painted  stele,  representing  two 
brothers  (?)  seated  face  to  face  embracing  each  other,  Amenemhot  and  Antef;  a 
.sister  or  wife,  A\',  is  behind  the  former;  an  aunt,  Hapy,  stands  making  the  offering 
behind  Antef  The  tombs  in  the  side  of  the  court  had  been  repeatedly  used,  until 
one  contained  no  less  than  thirty-three  coflins  crowded  in,  one  on  the  other. 
These  were  painted  with  feather  pattern,  and  probably  of  the  XVI  Ith  dynasty. 
The  gold  beads  found  were  of  the  style  of  those  in  the  burial  in  Quriieh.  A  four- 
stringed  lute  was  also  found. 

The  pit  tombs  in  the  floor  of  the  court  were  the  richest.  They  were  clearlj- 
of  the  early  XVI I  Ith  dynasty,  and  necessarily  before  Hatshepsut  who  built  over 
the  court.  Some  of  the  side  tombs  were  also  as  late  as  this,  as  they  had  tubular 
kohlpots.  The  largest  tomb  chapel,  with  an  enclosure  round  it,  was  for  a  super- 
intendent, Khay.     The  burials  continued  to  the  reign  of  Tehutmes  III,  as  a  scarab 


172  Reviews. 

of  his  was  found  in  this  pit,  a  matter  hard  to  reconcile  with  Hatshepsut  building 
over  it.  It  must  be  supposed  that  such  scarabs  were  made  during  the  reign  of 
Hatshepsut. 

Another  pit  proved  to  be  the  more  valuable.  The  pottery  was  white  with  red 
and  black  painting,  characteristic  of  the  age  of  Tehutmes  III.  Beside  more  usual 
objects,  there  was  a  glass  hairpin  with  rosette  head,  the  earliest  glass  pin  known  ; 
a  kohlbox  with  a  bronze  hinge  to  the  lid,  of  modern  type ;  a  massive  porphyry 
bowl  of  the  1st  dynasty,  evidently  reused ;  and  a  fine  bronze  s\\  ord  with  handle 
of  inlaid  wood.  On  one  burial  was  a  heart  scarab,  with  human  face  ;  it  was 
mounted  in  gold  plait  border  with  T-shaped  straps  on  the  back.  The  engraving  i& 
between  the  styles  of  Nos.  8  and  9  in  PI.  XLVII  of  Scarabs,  and  thus  it  justifies 
the  dating  of  those  to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  A  very  peculiar  weapon  found  by  a 
body  is  called  a  two-handled  sword.  It  seems  to  be  a  patchwork  of  a  large  bronze 
spear-head,  like  that  of  Kames,  to  which  has  been  fitted  a  wooden  handle  covered 
with  sheet  gold.  In  the  drawer  of  a  game  board  were  two  knuckle  bones  along 
with  twelve  draughtsmen,  showing  how  the  value  of  each  player's  move  was 
determined.  A  fine  lyre  was  also  found  here.  Altogether  this  is  a  very  interesting 
variety  of  objects,  closely  dated,  and  the  full  publication  of  them  is  the  next  duty 
of  the  finders. 

The  following  section  deals  with  the  clearing  of  the  tomb  of  Puamra  b\- 
Mr.  N.  de  G.  Davies.  After  the  usual  trouble  with  native  squatters,  the  whole 
of  the  court  of  this  tomb  was  acquired  and  cleared  ;  the  fragments  of  the  sculpture* 
were  collected,  and  over  two  hundred  of  these  have  been  rebuilt  into  a  restoration 
of  the  walls.  The  sculptures  arc  of  the  best  style  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  but  the 
sarcophagus  in  the  well  below  was  a  very  clumsy  mass,  only  vaguely  following  the 
human  form.  So  disappointed  is  Mr.  Davies  that  he  does  not  even  mention 
the  material.  The  forty  excellent  illustrations  and  plans  are  most  welcome,  but  we 
hope  that  they  will  not  be  allowed  to  excuse  a  full  publication.  Why  should  not 
the  work  of  the  winter  1915-16  appear  in  full  by  May,  1917?  The  English 
volumes  do  not  take  longer  than  this  to  be  issued,  at  least  before  the  war. 

Museum  of  Fine  Arts  Bulletin.     Boston,  June,  19 17. 

This  contains  the  report  of  Dr.  Reisner's  excavations  of  1915-16,  more  than  a 
year  before.  The  temple  of  Amen  and  the  royal  pyramids  at  Napata,  the  Ethiopian 
capital,  were  explored.  The  pyramids  had  not  been  entered  in  modern  times,  and 
their  system  was  unknown.  Now  it  is  found  that  the  entrances  are  far  out  from 
the  pyramids,  some  metres  beyond  the  door  of  the  pyramid  chapel  on  the  east  side. 
Twenty-five  pyramids  were  cleared,  but  all  had  been  completely  plundered 
anciently.  Only  in  one,  where  a  fall  of  roof  threatened,  was  found  a  hinged 
bracelet  of  gold,  of  the  usual  Ethiopian  style.  Further,  one  of  the  fourteen 
pyramids  of  Nuri  was  opened,  and  found  to  be  the  tomb  of  the  well-known  king 
Aspalut.  In  it  were  alabaster  vases,  gold  cylinders,  beads,  etc.,  left  by  plunderers. 
It  is  hoped  that  the  other  Nuri  tombs  may  yield  more. 

The  temple  of  Amen  is  described  as  extensive,  equal  to  any  temple  in  Egypt 
after  Karnak.  In  front  of  the  pylon,  was  found,  beneath  a  Meroitic  level  of  building, 
a  deposit  of  broken  statues  of  kings,  from  which  was  built  up  a  figure  of  Aspalut, 
and  another  of  Tirhaka,  all  but  the  head.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  temple,  in  a 
clearance,  was  found  another  group  of  broken  statues,  from  which  came  the  head 
of  the  previous  Tirhaka  statue,  and  other  figures  of  Tanutamen,  Amenanal  and 
Senka-amen-seken,  with   headless  figures  of  Amenanal,  Queen  Amen-mer-nefer, 


Reviews.  173 

and  two  of  Tanutamen.  The  work  of  these  is  stated  to  be  of  the  full  Egyptian 
style,  except  that  Senka-amen-seken  shows  some  falling  off. 

Five  temples  were  exposed  by  the  clearances,  and  all  of  them  had  been  rebuilt 
at  various  peridfts.  The  earliest  foundation  was  of  Tehutmes  III,  shown  by 
inscriptions,  and  Tehutmes  IV,  by  foundation  deposits.  The  latest  work  is  late 
Meroitic.     In  the  great  temple  five  periods  of  building  were  traced. 

A  temple  attributed  to  Senka-amen-seken,  by  his  name  on  the  pylon,  proved 
to  have  been  built  by  Atlanersa.  The  altar  was  dedicated  by  him,  and  many 
votive  offerings  and  statuettes  were  found  here.  The  temple  had  been  smashed 
twice  over  by  a  fall  of  the  cliffs  above  burying  it  ;  in  this  way  much  more  was  left 
of  the  smaller  objects  than  on  an  exposed  site. 

Egyptian  Records  of  Travel  in  Western  Asia,  Vol.  II. — David  Paton. 
60  pp.     1916.     (Princeton  University  Press.) 

Mr.  Paton  has  now  published  the  second  volume  of  his  Egyptian  Records  of 
Travel  in  Western  Asia.  The  accuracy  of  detail  as  shown  in  the  complicated 
system  of  setting  forth  each  text  with  references  to  its  every  publication,  the  mass 
of  numerals  and  variations  of  lettering  in  the  transliteration,  the  wealth  of  detail, 
are  amazing.  Whether  the  result  is  commensurate  with  the  vast  amount  of  care 
and  time  bestowed  upon  it  is  another  matter.  For  the  student  a  book  of  reference, 
such  as  this  is  intended  to  be,  should  be  simplified  as  much  as  possible  ;  otherwise 
its  value  is  always  lessened,  sometimes  even  destroyed.  This  is  most  markedly 
the  case  in  regard  to  the  column  devoted  to  transliteration.  This  column  is  a 
monument  of  anxious  and  careful  labour,  of  meticulous  precision,  of  extraordinary 
accuracy,  but  the  practical  result  is  that  no  one  will  use  it.  No  one  has  the  time 
to  spend  in  patiently  reversing  the  numerals  into  hieroglyphs  with  the  aid  of  the 
sign-list  in  Erman's  Grammar;  it  takes  too  long  and  is  not  worth  while.  If 
Mr.  Paton  had  only  given  the  signs  them.selves  instead  of  the  transliteration,  and 
had  expended  the  same  amount  of  care  in  making  the  publication  accurate,  that 
column  would  have  been  the  most  useful  in  the  whole  book.  It  is  difficult  to  know 
whether  Mr.  Paton  intends  his  book  for  advanced  .students  or  for  beginners.  If  for 
the  former  the  elementary  information — such  as  the  general  description  of  tombs 
on  p.  17.  and  the  phrase  "  In  the  Orient  the  Shepherd  follows  his  flock,"  on  p.  38 — 
are  out  of  place,  while  for  the  beginner  the  subject  and  arrangement  are  unsuitable. 
The  needs  of  the  two  classes  of  student  are  quite  distinct,  and  an  author  should  be 
very  clear  as  to  which  class  he  wishes  to  address  his  work.  Though  by  means 
of  its  faulty  arrangement  the  book  may  fail  in  its  aim  of  being  the  standard 
reference  book  on  the  historical  geography  of  Western  Asia,  yet  the  pains  and 
labour  bestowed  upon  it  are  not  thrown  away,  and  Mr.  Paton  will  rank  as  one 
of  the  most  accurate  .scholars  that  America  has  produced. 

M.    A.    MUURAY. 

Antiquites  en  fer  et  en  bronze,  leiir  transformation  .  .  .  .  et  leur  conservation. — 
G.  A.  Rosenberg.     8vo.    92  pp.,  20  figs.     Copenhague.     1917. 

This  useful  work  is  published  by  the  p-ondation  Carlsberg.  The  main  line 
of  it  is  the  detailed  study  of  the  compounds  of  iron  and  copper  that  are  formed,  and 
the  proper  treatment  of  them.  The  various  sources  of  decomposition  are  stated, 
and  the  changes  that  can  be  experimentally  produced.  Chlorine  is  the  great 
enemy  of  all  metals  ;  in  no  way  can  it  be  rendered  harmless  in  combination,  and  it 
must  be  removed  by  some  means.     A  new  process  here  is  the  testing  by  damp  air. 


1 74  Reviews. 

In  a  glass  jar  with  moisture,  iron  or  copper  begins  to  sweat  out  deliquescent  salts, 
the  appearance  of  which  is  detailed  as  showing  the  nature  of  the  compounds 
involved. 

in  the  most  usual  case  of  iron,  which  is  a  metallic  core  with  much  oxidation 
crusted  over  it,  the  method  adopted  is  to  pack  with  asbestos  paper  and  bind  up 
closely  with  iron  wire.  Heat  red-hot  for  1 5  minutes,  thus  driving  off  most  of  the 
chlorine.  Plunge  red-hot  in  saturated  solution  of  alkaline  carbonate.  Boil  in  that, 
2  to  6  hours.  Boil  in  distilled  water,  12  hours.  Soak  in  water  slightly  alkaline; 
next  day  in  distilled  water.  Heat,  and  put  in  superheated  paraffin  wax  at  260°  F. 
until  no  bubbles  arise,  6  to  14  hours.  Unwrap  and  clean  off  surplus  wax.  A 
special  cement  is  described  for  paraffined  fragments. 

For  bronze,  the  detection  of  a  dangerous  chloride  patination  from  a  harmless 
carbonate  patination  is  done  in  the  damp-air  chamber.  The  varieties  of  patina 
are  fully  described,  but  as  they  are  usually  mixed,  no  single  treatment  is  entirely 
applicable.  The  writer  objects  to  the  drastic  stripping  of  bronzes  by  electric 
reduction,  as  advocated  in  Berlin.  He  has  devised  a  process  for  the  reduc- 
tion of  dangerous  patches  of  chloride,  without  any  alteration  of  the  harmless 
carbonate.  This  is  by  wrapping  in  foil  of  tin,  aluminium,  or  zinc,  and  placing  in 
damp  air.  The  chlorides  sweat  out  and  are  immediately  decomposed  by  the  foil. 
In  order  to  ensure  action,  any  thick  lumps  must  be  cut  open,  or  drilled  into  with  a 
dentist's  drill.  To  prevent  the  deliquescent  chlorides  soaking  on  to  the  rest  of  the 
metal,  a  jelly  may  be  put  over  the  object  which  only  retards  the  action,  but  allows 
the  chlorides  to  pass  through  freely.  For  local  treatment  of  patches  on  large  objects 
a  plaster  may  be  made  of  tin,  zinc,  or  aluminium  powder,  mixed  with  i  per  cent, 
glue,  S  per  cent,  water,  and  2  per  cent,  glycerine,  and  laid  on  to  the  dangerous 
parts.  Thus  the  processes  here  are  strictly  conservative,  and  remove  nothing  that 
can  be  left  safely  in  place.  They  are  applicable  to  the  better  preserved  objects, 
and  do  not  touch  the  cases  of  those  which  need  stripping.  The  writer  does  not 
seem  to  have  studied  the  condition  of  the  metal  as  a  mixture  of  two  or  more 
alloys,  one  of  which  will  always  tend  to  change  by  contact  with  the  other,  and  one 
of  which  may  be  entirely  removed,  leaving  a  sponge  of  metal. 

Atlantis. — Pierre  TermIER.  {Smithsoniau  Report,  1915).  8vo,  16  pp. 
Washington,  1916. 

The  Director  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  France  gives  here  an  outline  of  the 
subject  of  Atlantis,  which  has  for  many  minds  a  fascination  like  that  of  Perpetual 
Motion  or  the  Lost  Tribes.  That  there  have  been  great  shiftings  of  land  and  water 
in  later  geologic  times  is  well  known,  and  will  be  familiar  to  every  reader  of  that 
delightful  little  book,  Gadow's  Wanderings  of  Animals.  Down  to  the  Middle 
Tertiary  Age,  Africa  and  South  America  were  connected.  The  Atlantis  question 
turns  on  whether  there  were  any  lands  which  sank  into  the  Atlantic  within  human 
tradition,  and  which  could  have  given  rise  to  the  account  of  Atlantis,  embellished 
by  Plato.  As  the  Atlantides  were  said  to  have  ruled  over  the  South  Mediterranean, 
including  Libya  and  Egypt,  the  question  concerns  us  here. 

A  zoologist,  M.  Louis  Germain,  studied  the  subject  of  the  distribution  of 
plants  and  animals  bearing  on  the  Atlantis  question.  The  present  territorial  fauna 
of  the  archipelagoes  of  the  Azores,  Madeira,  Canaries,  and  Cape  dc  Verde,  are  of 
continental  origin,  with  indications  of  adaptation  to  desert  life.  They  are  linked 
with  the  Mediterranean  region,  but  differ  from  the  equatorial  African.     The  latest 


Revieivs.  175 

deposits  of  the  Canaries — quaternary — are  like  those  of  Maurctania,  with  the  same 
mollusca.  Several  other  connections  of  rather  earlier  period,  between  Africa  and 
the  West  Indies,  do  not  touch  the  recent,  or  human,  period.  It  seems,  however, 
very  probable  that' the  Atlantic  islands  were  still  linked  to  the  African  coast  long 
after  man  had  spread  on  the  earth,  and  hence  a  tradition  of  a  great  submersion 
might  well  have  survived. 

Catalogue  of  the  Collection  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities  in  the  possession 
of  Lord  Leconfield — Hon.  Marg.^ret  WViVDHAM.  Sm.  4to,  142  pp.,  86  plates. 
191 5.     (Medici  Society.) 

This  catalogue  contains  one  bust  with  an  Egyptian  interest ;  it  is  of  a  boy 
consecrated  to  Isis.  The  mark  of  consecration  is  the  thick  mass  of  hair  projecting 
on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  while  the  rest  is  closely  cropped.  It  is  attributed  to 
the  third  century  A.n.,  but  is  early  in  that  period  by  the  quality  of  the  work.  As  a 
mark  of  the  devotion  to  Isis  in  Italy  this  is  another  link  of  the  orientalizing  of  the 
West.  The  catalogue  should  be  mentioned  as  one  of  the  most  perfect  examples 
of  the  utilisation  of  a  private  collection  ;  the  photogravure  plates  are  excellent,  and 
the  lighting  good,  though  it  might  have  been  better  from  the  top  in  some  cases ; 
the  text  is  concise  and  sufficient.  In  every  point  it  shows  a  dignified  utility 
without  frivolous  luxury.  The  only  regret  is  that  it  is  limited  to  an  edition  of  200 
for  private  circulation.  At  least  it  can  always  be  used  in  the  Yates  Library  at 
University  College. 


.76    ) 


PERIODICALS. 


The  second  part  of  Vol.  XIII  of  the  Bulletin  de  F Institut  Franqais  d'Archeologie 
Orientale  has  been  issued  under  the  direction  of  M.  Georges  P'oucart.  More  than 
fifty  of  its  pages  are  filled  by  an  essay  by  M.  Georges  Daressy  upon  the  geography 
of  Egypt,  from  the  time  of  the  Mahomedan  conquest,  as  illustrated  by  an  Arabic 
work  entitled  The  Book  of  the  Buried  Pearls,  which  professed  to  give  a  catalogue 
of  sites  whereat  hidden  treasures  might  be  found.  These  include,  not  only  old 
Egyptian  temples  and  other  ruins,  but  also  Christian  churches  and  monasteries, 
caves  and  grottoes,  and  certain  hills,  mounds  and  lakes. 

The  Book  of  the  Buried  Pearls  and  of  Precious  Mystery,  which  was  re- 
published from  three  manuscripts  some  ten  years  ago  by  Ahmed  bey  Kamal,  is, 
doubtless,  an  imposition  upon  its  readers ;  but  a  work  promising  to  foretell  places 
where  buried  treasures  may  be  expected  to  be  disinterable,  especially  in  a  country 
such  as  Egypt,  was  certain  to  find  credulous  purchasers.  How  much  destruction 
of  monuments  and  remains  of  ancient  art  its  pages  have  been  responsible  for,  we 
shall  never  know. 

M.  Daressy  is  utilising  the  only  feature  of  the  text  that  can  be  made  useful  for 
science,  in  endeavouring  to  decide  both  the  ancient  and  the  modern  names  of  the 
Arabic  titles-it  gives  for  many  of  the  sites  it  enumerates.  For  this  purpose  he  has 
searched  the  works  of  Makrisi,  Abu  Saleh,  the  Geography  of  Coptic  Egypt,  by 
M.  Amelineau,  and  all  modern  topographical  treatises  and  maps.  He  does  not 
mention  the  Geography  of  Lower  Egypt  at  the  Coptic  Period,  by  the  younger 
de  Rouge,  but  doubtless  made  use  of  that  excellent  little  work.  Many  of 
M.  Daressy's  identifications  are,  however,  derived  from  his  own  erudition. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  the  author,  in  mentioning  edifices  at  certain  sites,  knew 
they  were  still  in  existence,  even  if  mostly  ruined,  when  he  wrote,  or  whether  he 
was  merely  a  copyist  of  older  gazetteers,  and  the  monuments  may  have  disappeared 
before  his  time.  For  instance,  at  Bahnasa,  the  ancient  Oxyrhynchus,  he  gives  the 
church  of  "  Nestofor."  This  M.  Daressy  points  out  should  be  Christopher,  .^bu 
Saleh  misnamed  it  Istafoura.  In  the  Synaxarium  it  became  Akhristofares.  There 
is  no  trace  to-day  of  this  or  any  other  edifice  of  ancient  times  at  Bahnasa. 

Doubtless  there  is  some  method,  or  excuse  in  certain  instances,  for  the  promi.se 
of  wealth  for  fortune  hunters  who  follow  the  author's  advice.  Thus  he  states  that 
at  (Tel)  el-Farain  "  If  you  search  you  will  find  a  coffer  containing  treasure,  coins 
and  jewellery."  Now  one  of  the  mounds  of  this  Tel  is  called  the  Kom  el-Sagha,  or 
jewel  mound.  This  must  have  arisen  from  a  "  find  "  there  at  some  time,  probably 
befofe  the  composition  of  the  Book  of  the  Buried  Pearls,  whose  author,  knowing  of 
the  occurrence,  prophesied  further  results  of  the  same  character. 

The  article  of  M.  Dares.sy  is  only  the  first  upon  this  subject,  and  .so  further 
comment  is  postponed  for  the  present.  On  this  occasion  he  provides  three  maps, 
the  last  reaching  as  far  south  as  Sohag. 

Another  very  interesting  paper  in  the  Bulletin  is  M.  Henri  Gauthier's  "La 
N^cropole  de  Thebes  et  .son  Personnel,"  which  treats  of  the  religious  fraternity,  or 
Association  of  Employees  connected  with   the  Theban  necropolis,  who  seem  to 


Periodicals.  177 

have  been  always  buried  upon  the  hill  of  Deir  el-Medineh  during  the  period  of  the 
XVIIIth-XXth  dynasties.     They  called  this  sacred  site  "the  place  of  truth"  (or 

the  true  place)   ta  the  west  of  Thebes   n \      •  T     i  and  from  their 

sepulchral  records  it  is  possible  to  enumerate  the  various  positions  in  the  hierarchy, 
or  rather  grades  of  employment,  of  the  cemetery  servitors. 

Some  six  of  the  posts  had  been  catalogued  by  Brugsch ;  and  Maspero,  after 
his  mission  to  Italj'  somewhere  before  1880,  utilising  the  many  antiquities  from 
Thebes  in  the  Turin  Museum,  augmented  the  number  to  eight.  So  vast  has  been 
the  advance  of  the  science  of  Egyptology  that  M.  Gauthier  has  been  able  to 
increase  the  list  to  forty  titles,  and  doubtless  his  article  will  lead  other  scholars  to 
point  out  a  few  more.     One  of  the  additions  of  M.  Gauthier  is  that  of  "  Reis  of  the 

workmen  "  'Xj"  'www  3  ,  which   he  derives  from    the  text    found  upon  a 

M    fl  U  I  I  I 

Hymn   to  Amen   Ra,  discovered   in  the  present  year,  in  a  tomb  uncovered  at 

Deir  el-Medineh. 

M.   Gauthier  collects    the    forty   members   into   seven   categories.      First,  the 

mere  workmen  :  masons,  path  and   terrace  makers.     Second,  artizans  :  sculptors, 

painters,  carpenters,  wood  carvers.     Third,  administrators  :    clerks  and  secretaries 

for  the  funds  bequeathed  for  upkeep  of  tombs,  paymasters,  and  accountants  who 

apportioned  the  expenditure  for  the  funerary  offerings  and  festivals,  which  were 

annual,  and   in  .sepulchres  of  the  wealthy  more  frequent.     Fourth,  servants  of  all 

descriptions  required  to  be  employed  in  the  upkeep  of  the.se  ceremonials  and  of  the 

repair  and  good  condition  of  the  tombs.     They  may  be  called  Domestics  of  the 

Dead.     Fifth,  the  officers  and  superintendents  of  the  police  and  guardians  of  the 

necropolis.    From  the  Abbott  papyrus  of  the  trial  of  the  tomb  thieves,  we  know  how 

necessary  these  were,  and  what  illicit  emoluments  the  dishonest  members  of  this 

branch  of  the  fraternity  received  by  way  of  baksheesh  for  purposely  neglecting 

their  duty.     Sixth,  priests,  officiants  and  clergy  of  all  grades  who  knew  how  to 

canonically  perform  all  the  sacred  ceremonies  of  the  cult  for  the  dead,  the  magic 

rites,  and    recitations,  faithfully  following  the  formulae  bequeathed  from  bygone 

ages   of    priestcraft.       M.    Gauthier's    seventh    category    is    merely    a    convenient 

receptacle,  as  he  naively  says,  for  containing  all  the  remaining  titles  that  cannot 

properly  find  a  place  in  the  six  others. 

Three  of  the  grades  have  the  special  appellation  of  sedem  oshu  ^__  ^^  1 , 

which  he  renders  "  servitor,"  as  did  Sir  Gaston  Maspero.  He  appends  twenty-one 
instances  of  this  title  upon  various  records,  adding  the  twelve  provided  by 
Maspero  in  the  second  volume  of  the  Recueil  de  Travaux. 

Among  the  latter  is  the  "  Servitor  of  the  administration  of  the  palace 
pati-sserie,"  (or  confiserie),  a  close  ally  of  the  royal  chief  baker  whose  monument  is 
at  Copenhagen,  and  certainly  not  a  distant  connexion  of  the  Pharaoh's  chief  baker 
in  the  story  of  Joseph. 

Mr.  F.  W.  Read  is  writer  of  an  article  upon  the  meaning  of  the  word 
fr\  nl"^^  V^^'  ^^h''^*'  ^''-  '"^1^"  Gardiner  renders  "Dragoman."  He  cites  a 
number  of  papyri  and  inscriptions  tending  to  show  that  its  concept  is  best  conveyed 
to  us  by  the  term  .scholars.  The  same  writer  supplies  a  paper  upon  "Boats  or 
Fortified  Villages,"  referring  to  the  representations  upon  prehistoric  pottery. 

J.  Offoru. 
M 


(     178     ) 


NOTES. 


In  Dr.  W.  D.  Spanton's  most  interesting  and  charmingly  illustrated  account  of 
the  "Water  Lilies  of  Ancient  Egypt,"  in  Part  I  of  ANCIENT  EGYPT,  1917,  we  do 
not  find  mention  of  the  use  of  these  flowers  in  painted  pavement  decoration. 
Many  such  specimens  can  be  seen  in  the  Museum  of  Antiquities  at  Cairo,  on  the 
walls  of  a  secluded  upper  gallery.  These  plaques  were  brought  from  Akhenaten's 
Palace  at  Tell  el-Amarna.  The  beaten  earthen  surface  of  the  floors  of  halls  of 
reception  here  was  thickly  covered  with  lime  to  make  a  stucco  pavement.  The 
smooth  surface  was  then  painted  over  with  varied  designs  representing  waterways, 
with  aquatic  birds  and  beasts  among  the  vegetation  ;  the  clumps  of  grasses, 
flowering  plants,  and  oxen  running  among  the  reeds,  are  all  depicted  in  various 
colours.  Lotus  and  papyrus  are  frequent,  and  the  colour  scheme  is  rather  peculiar. 
Painted  on  a  white  ground,  red,  blue,  and  green  predominate.  Foliage  and  stems 
green  with  red  and  blue  flowers.  The  Lotuses  were  mostly  blue  with  red  sepals 
and  edge  to  the  floral  cup  ;  some  were  green  with  a  red  edge,  buds  were  painted 
similarly  with  green  stalks.  Among  many  other  forms  of  plants,  which  we  need 
not  discuss,  were  red  poppies  and  blue  cornflowers  (see  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna, 
Pis.  II,  III,  IV). 

On  page  3  there  is  a  brief  allusion  to  the  sepulchral  wreaths,  specimens  of 
which  can  be  studied  in  the  same  galleries.  The  elaborate  method  of  formation 
of  these  wreaths  is  very  striking,  and  accounts  for  their  having  been  preserved 
intact  from  the  time  of  the  XlXth  dynasty  to  the  present  day.  They  were  many 
yards  long ;  on  a  firmly  plaited  palm-leaf  fibre  foundation  were  tied  a  close 
succession  of  leaves  of  Mimusops  Kummel,  a  tree  belonging  to  the  family  Sapotaceae, 
with  large  oval  leathery  leaves.  Each  mimusops  leaf  is  carefully  split  and  folded, 
and  tied  to  the  foundation  with  a  narrow  thong  of  fibre,  and  within  each  leaf  and 
projecting  beyond  it  is  placed  a  petal  of  Nytnphaea  Coerulea ;  these  petals  are 
marvellously  preserved,  smooth  and  flat,  and  have  dried  from  the  rather  thick 
fleshy  substance  to  a  thin  membranous  tissue,  in  colour  either  brown,  pale  brown, 
or  nearly  white.  When  the  mummy  of  Rameses  II  was  re-decorated  during  the 
XXth  dynasty,  the  new  mimusops  wreaths  were  adorned  with  petals  of  Nymphaca 
Lotus,  which  can  be  distinguished  from  the  blue  one,  in  the  dried  state,  by  a  more 
distinct  veining.  Many  other  flowers  were  used  as  well  as  water  lilies,  as  the 
sweet-scented  "sunt"  {^Acacia  Nilotica),  but  we  restrict  our  remarks  to  the  Lotus. 

Eleonora  Armitage. 

The  following  Index  was  in  preparation  for  this  number  long  before  there 
was  any  idea  that  printing  would  be  suspended  by  the  war.  It  is  intended  to 
give  an  index  every  four  years,  as  being  the  most  convenient  interval  for  reference. 
The  white  covers  should  be  bound  in  with  the  parts,  as  being  the  title  pages  and 
contents.  The  summaries  of  Journals  will  be  resumed  from  the  present  point  when 
the  ne.xt  number  can  be  issued. 


(     179    ) 


SCOTTISH    WOMEN'S    HOSPITALS, 
LONDON    UNITS. 


In  the  last  number,  we  announced  the  collection  of  funds  from  members  of  the 

British  School   of   Archaeology  in  Egypt  for  the  London  Units  of  the  Scottish 

Women's  Hospitals.     I  would  also  invite  the  help  of  readers  of  this  journal  towards 

the  maintenance  of  these  hospitals. 

The  list  of  donations  issued  in  August  amounted  to  £2"^'/  6s.  6d.     I  append  a 

second  list  amounting  to  ;^227  %s.  i  id. : — 
Brought  forward  £2T,y  6s.  6d. 

Mrs.  Douglas-Cow,  Miss  Gilstrap,  Dr.  J.  Haworth  ...  ...     each  £\o 

Mrs  Bishop,  i:8  I4J.         Prof.  W.  P.  Ker ;^S  i6i^. 

Capt.  Clive  Behrens,  C.  A.  Flint      ...         ...         ...         each         £^   5^. 

Lord  Abercromby,  Mrs.  R.  M.  Caulfeild,  E.  J.  Horniman,  S.  Chisenhale  Marsh, 
/^r  Mrs.  John  Masefield  ...         ...         ...  .  ...     each  ^5 

Mrs.  J.  J.  Stevenson  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  £\ 

John  L.  Barker,  Mrs.  Edw.  Davis,  Mrs.  Philip  Fletcher,  Horace  Sanders 

each         £1  IS. 

/'^r  Mrs.  John  Masefield,  ;^3  ij.  3</.         R.Dempster      ...         £1 

Mrs.  Aspland,  H.  Carter,  M.  V.  Charrington,  J.  E.  Cornvvell,  A.  N.  Disney, 
Sir  James  Dobbie,  P'.R.S.,  H.  G.  Erith,  Percival  Hart,  Prof.  F.  Montague, 
Very  Rev.  J.  C.  Russell,  Dr.  C.  G.  Seligman,  Dr.  A.  H.  Thompson,  Mrs. 
Tubbs       ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     each         £2  2s. 

Misses  Baring-Gould,  Mrs.  Johns  Copland,  Mrs.  Curling  Hayward,  Mrs.  MacLeod, 
H.  D.  Pearsall,  Dr.  Alfred  Simson      ...         ...         ...         ...     each  £2 

Sigismund  Bruzaud    ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  £1    \\s.  6d. 

Dowager  Lady  Amherst  of  Hackney,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Ayers,  Mrs.  Barbour,  Horace 
C.  Beck,  G.  F.  Bell.  Mrs.  Brend,  E.  W.  Brooks,  Henry  Bubb,  R.  Burnard, 
Lady  William  Cecil,  Baroness  Amherst  of  Hackney,  Mrs.  Herbert  Cohen, 
F.  C.  Danson,  Mi.ss  Davies,  J.  W.  Drummond,  N.  Eumorfopoulos,  L.  R. 
Furneaux,  Dr.  Willingham  Gell,  W.  Geoghegan,  Lady  Godlee,  Lord  Guthrie, 
Miss  F.  M.  Harvey,  Mrs.  Hazell,  C.  Heape,  Miss  Hewitt,  Miss  L.  L.  King, 
Rev.  H.  M.  Livens,  S.  E.  Lo.xton,  Miss  Margetson,  Dr.  Alex.  Muirhead, 
H.  Myer-s,  Geo.  \.  Nathan,  Miss  G.  Naylor,  A.  J.  Neville,  W.  J.  Newton, 
Mrs.  O'Flanagan.  W.  B.  Pigg,  A.  B.  Potter,  Mrs.  Russell  Rea,  F.  W.  Read, 
T.  R.  Redfern,  H.  M.  Robarts,  Mrs.  Myer  Salaman,  Mrs.  Samuel,  Sir  Geo. 
Savage,  M.D.,  J.  Schwartz,  jun.,  H.  Sefton-Jones,  Capt.  Kdw.  Shepherd,  His 
Hon.  Judge  .Smyly,  Capt.  .Spencer-Churchill,  "  Stroud  Box  4,"  Mrs.  J.  J, 
Thomson,  Dr.  Walker-Dunbar,  C.  Whymper,  Mrs  Arnold  Williams,  G.  A. 
Wills        each         £\    \s. 

Lieut.-Col.  W.  V.  R.  Fane,  G.  Bennett  Gibbs,  F.-M.  Lord  Grenfell,  Miss  L  Hope, 
H.  Llewelyn  Howell,  Miss  Ken.sington,  F.  Marteili,  Samuel  Price,  Miss  A.  J. 
Reynolds,  Miss  Eleanor  Rowe,  Miss  Turnor...         ...         ...     each  ^i 

Dr.  Colquhoun,  H.  Marshall,  each  14^.         Mrs.  Trevithick,  M.D.         ...  13J. 

M   2 


i8o  Scottish  Wotiten's  Hospitals,  London  Units. 

Mrs.  Bateson,  Mrs.  Bonser,  W.  Claridge,  G.  A.  Garfitt,  Mi.ss  Southwell,  F.  Towry 
Whyte     ...         ...     each        ios.6cl. 

A  Belgian  per  Miss  Draper,  Dr.  W.  E.  Hoyle,  Mrs.  Orr,  Miss  Phelps,  Thos.  Plunkett, 
Rt.  Hon.  Lord  Reay,  Miss  Robinson,  Rev.  E.  F.  Russell,  R.  Sewell,  John 
Smith,  C.B.,  Edw.  Steele,  Dr.  Alien  Sturge,  A.  W.  Sutton,  Mrs.  J.  H.  Walker 

each  I  OS. 

Miss  Croft,  Mrs.  M.  E.  Hurst,  Dr.  Edwin  Odgers,  each  gs.,      Misses  Draper,  js.  6d. 

H.  J.  Torpey,  6s.  a^d.         O.  Marriage,  Mrs.  A.  K.  Morgan  ...     each  ^s. 

Mrs.  Bacon,  Rev.  H.  Kendall,  each  is.         Mrs.  Huddart  2s.  ^d. 

Total  up  to  present  date       £464  15J.  Sd. 

The  Edinburgh  Units. — The  Scottish  Women's  Hospitals  were  founded  by 
Dr.  Elsie  Inglis  and  her  colleagues  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  and  have  served 
gallantly  in  many  countries  of  the  Allies.  They  began  work  for  the  Belgians  at 
Calais,  and  other  Units  were  equipped  and  sent  forward  to  serve  the  French  at 
Royaumont  and  Troycs ;  then  Dr.  Inglis  took  her  own  Units  to  Serbia,  and  other 
Units  have  served  in  Greece,  Macedonia,  Corsica,  and  elsewhere. 

The  hospital  at  the  Abbaye  de  Royaumont,  under  the  French  Red  Cross, 
has  been  considered  one  of  the  best  in  France.  A  hut  hospital  is  now  placed  in 
advance,  near  the  firing  line.  Three  canteens  have  been  established  in  this  part 
of  France. 

The  hospital  at  Troyes  was  under  the  P'rench  Command,  and  was  the  earliest 
hospital  under  canvas  in  France.  By  request  of  the  military  authorities  it 
accompanied  the  French  Expeditionary  Force  to  Salonika.  An  orthopaedic 
department  has  lately  been  added. 

At  Ostrovo  there  is  a  hospital,  supported  by  American  contributions,  which 
has  an  advance  station  up  country,  near  the  firing  line,  and  Transport  Column 
attached. 

A  hospital  for  tubercular  treatment  for  Serbians  is  being  opened  in  the  south 
of  France. 

In  Corsica  the  Scottish  Women's  Hospitals  relieve  Serbian  refugees. 

The  London  Units. — Dr.  Elsie  Inglis'  Serbian  campaign,  1915-16,  was  a 
triumphant  effort,  which  seems  like  an  epic  to  those  who  watched  it.  Her  hospitals 
were  justly  famed.  Typhus  was  beaten  back,  and  the  Serbians  will  never  forget 
our  doctor's  name.  A  fountain  at  Mladnovatz,  commemorating  her  work,  still 
remains. 

The  next  campaign,  1916-17,  was  in  Rumania,  where  her  hospitals  and 
Transport  Column  were  attached  to  the  Serbian  Divisions,  and  suffered  with  them 
three  retreats.  After  an  interval  of  work  for  Russians  she  rejoined  her  Serbs,  and 
the  crowning  feat  of  her  life  was  the  removal,  in  spite  of  every  obstacle,  of  the.se 
Serbians  out  of  Russia.     Then,  November  26,  her  life  was  laid  down. 

Dr.  Inglis'  last  wish  was  to  dispatch  new  Units  to  serve  those  same  Serbian 
Divisions  in  their  new  destination.  She  contemplated  a  base  hospital  of  200  and 
field  hospital  of  icx)  beds,  with  motor  transport  for  both,  and  a  staff  of  five  doctors 
and  forty  sisters  and  orderlies.  Our  advance  Unit  and  equipment  will  go  forward 
at  once,  and  it  is  to  provide  and  maintain  reinforcements  that  help  is  required. 

H.  Flinders  Petrie, 
University  College,  Hon.  Secretary, 

Gower  Street,  W.C.  i.  London  Units  Scottish  Women's  Hospitals. 


INDEX 


1914  marked  as  A,  191 5  as  B,  1916  as  C,  1917  as  D. 

Letters  are  used  for  clearness  along  with  the  page  numbers. 

All  entries  are  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  Egypt. 

Books  and  articles  are  referred  to  by  subject,  and  not  verbatim. 

This  index  will  serve  for  the  foreign  periodicals,  1913-1916,  as  every  ancient  name  is  entered. 

1914  Part  I  is  out  of  print  and  cannot  be  supplied. 


Aaba,  B  80. 

Aakhu  birds  on  cylinders,  A  64,  B  80. 

Aamu,  C  89,  90. 

Aa  pudu  tomb,  B  7. 

Aba  tomb  copied,  C  JJ. 

Abies  =  ash  tree,  D  126. 

Abu  Sergeh  church,  C  56. 

Abu  Seyfeyn  church,  C  57. 

Abu  Simbel,  artists'  signatures,  A  132. 

„  racial  types  at,  D  57. 

Abydos,  excavations  at,  A  103,  C  75. 

„        temple  of  Ramessu  II,  C  121, 
176-80. 
Accession  of  kings,  reckoning  by,  C  118. 
Acheulean  flints,  B  64-68. 
Ada,  priest,  D  93. 
Adjectives  as  relatives,  C  79. 
Administration,  local,  D  139. 
Adobe,  from  Coptic  and  Arabic,  C  8c. 
Adze,  copper,  B  12. 
Aegean  archaeology,  B  36. 
Aelius  Publius,  D  123. 
Aemilianus,  L.  Mussius,  D  122. 
Aemilianus  Rusticianus,  D  123. 
Africa,  Egypt  in,  A  115,  159,  B  103. 

„       civilisation  in  West,  A  84. 

„       religion  of  West,  A  85. 
Agathodoros,  B  57. 
Agini-rherhe,  A  176,  D  38. 
Agnosticism  in  Egypt,  A  25,  42. 
Ahmed  Bey  Kamal,  Excavations,  C  36, 

39- 
Ahti  (Bes),  B  85. 


Akhenaten,  art  of,  C  76. 

„  coffin  of,  C  185. 

„  heart  scarab  of,  B  168. 

„  large  scarab  of,  D  129. 

Akhmim  rock  shrine,  B  24. 
Akmar,  E.,  on  Magic  Papyrus,  D  69. 
Alabaster  vases,  Karma,  C  87. 
„  Lahun,  A  99. 

„  Syria,  D  41. 

Alashiya,  land  of,  A  178,  B  35. 

„         source  of  copper,  B  12. 
Alexander  Severus,  B  184. 
Alexandria  Museum  catalogue,    B  188, 

C  21. 
Alexandrian  archaeology,  B  57,  188. 

„  coinage  of  Gallienus,  D  1 52. 

philosophy,  A  30,  31. 
„  topography,  B  188. 

Allan,  Miss  D.  K.,  B  95. 
Alphabet    forming   in    XVIIIth-XXth 

dynasty,  D  97. 
Altars  for  offerings,  A  126. 
A  mam,  hippopotamus,  A  27. 
Amarna,  excavations  at,  D  140. 

„         plan  at,  D  21,  141. 
Am^lineau,  Coptic  Grammar,  C  20. 
„  St.  Cyril  sermon,  C  20. 

Amen,  goose  of,  A  36. 

in  Libya,  A  184,  185. 
origin  of,  D  1 17. 
procession  of,  A  142. 
temple  at  Napata,  D  173. 
worship  of,  D  1 12. 

M  3 


Index. 


Amenanal,  statue,  D  173. 
Amenardys,  Queen,  A  41. 

„  heart  scarab,  C  83. 

Amenemhot  I,  altar,  A  136,  B  188. 
Amenemhot  II,  age  of  Ukh-hetep,  C  88. 
Amenemhot  III,  adored,  B  26. 
„  head  of,  A  48. 

„  Nubian  date,  C  74. 

„  portraiture,  C  188. 

„  in  Sinai,  A  9,  D  104. 

Amenemhat,  stele  of,  D  171. 
„  tomb  of,  B  139. 

Amenhetep  I,  ring  of,  B  168. 

„  tomb  of,  A  143. 

Amenhetep  II,  scarabs,  C  24. 

„  toilet  box,  B  85. 

Amenhetep  III,  clepsydra  of,  D  42. 

,.  founded     kingdom     of 

Meroe,  A  176,  D  17. 
„  miraculous      birth      of, 

A  141,  188. 
„  monuments  of,  A  36,  27- 

„  offering  to  Sopt,  D  107. 

„  palace  of,  C  86. 

Amenhetep  IV,  see  Akhenaten. 
Amenhetep,  son  of  Hapy,  figure  of,  C  35. 

„  invoked,  A  130,  C  35. 

Amenmes,  D  129. 
Amenrcnas,  queen,  A  176,  D  37. 
Amen-shaghct,  A  176. 
Amentet,   gods,   amulets    and    scarabs, 

C44. 
Amenuser,  vizier,  see  U.ser,  A  ^7. 
American  branch  of  Research  Account, 
C  84. 
„  cross,  source  of,  C  [08. 

Ameth\-st  necklace,  A  98. 
„  source  of,  B  88. 

Amorites,  C  135. 

Amsden,  Dr.,  A45, 102, 191,  B95, 144, 191. 
,,  on    Skulls   of   Xllth    dy- 

.?  nasty,  B  53. 

Amu  nome  place-names,  D  131. 
Amulets  (W.  M.  F.  Petrie),  A  91. 

„         Some  pendant,  D  49. 
Analyses  of  metals.  B  14. 
Anastasius,  C  100. 
Ancestral  spirit,  A  162. 
Ancient   History  of  Near  Ea.st  (Hall), 
A  90. 


Ancient  Times  (Breasted),  D  86. 
Angels,  recording,  B  104. 
Anher,  worship  of,  D  114. 
Anibeh,  A  143. 

Animal  gods  before  earliest  graves,  D  1 16. 
„       heads  on  handles,  A  113. 
„       signs  mutilated.  B  89. 
„       skulls  hung  up,  A  164,  B  88. 
„       worship,  primitive,  A  17. 
Animals  of  tribes,  A  163. 
rare,  C  43. 
„         sacred,  A  188. 
Animism,  A  17. 
Ankh,  see  Onkh. 
Anmutef,  A  124,  D  168. 
Annals,  new  portions  of,  C  1 14. 
„       extent  of,  C  183,  D  70. 
Annianus,  D  122. 
Anpu-em-amiut,  B  192. 
Anpu-em-hot,  B  7. 
Antaeopolis,  A  35. 
Anta-snezem-ab,  A  88. 
Antef  kings'  list,  C  82. 

„      Ra-kheper-nub,  C  82,  167. 
„      Uah-onkh,  A  35,  C  82. 
„      tombs,  C  82. 
„      general,  A  135. 
„      son  of  Mayt,  C  80,  D  38. 
„      stele  of,  D  171. 
Antimony,  B  23. 
Antinoe,  A  143. 

„         tokens,  B  1 1 5. 
Antiquities,  new  law  on,  A  128. 

„  preservation       of,     A      140, 

D  174. 
Antoninus,  ring  of,  B  168. 
Antony,  descendants  of,  D  11 2. 
Anu  smitten,  A  12,  C  89. 
Anup,  symbol  in  shrine,  B  150. 
„       weigher  of  souls,  B  27. 
„       worship  of,  D  112. 
Apis  bull  on  tokens,  B  108. 
Aoha-ardas,  B  28. 
Aohmes  I,  C  23. 
Aohmes  Hcnt-ta-mehu,  B  loi. 
Aohmes-sa-neit,  A  36,  B  27,  28. 
Aohmes-sa-paar,  C  154. 
Aohmes  son  of  Abana,  C  7S. 
Aohsen,  A  73. 
Apa  Telemc,  stela  of,  A  156. 


Index. 


Apa,  kohl-pot,  A  4. 
Apis  bull  on  tokens,  B  108. 
„     ritual  death  of,  D  85. 
Approbation  the  ftiotive,  not  duty,  A  55. 
Arabic  epitaphs,  D  70. 
Architectural    sketch    at    Sheikh    Said, 

D  21,  142. 
Architecture    in    Egypt    and    Nigeria, 

A  170. 
Arenna,  A  174. 
Arimathaea,  Baramus,  C  12. 
Arks  for  Eucharist,  C  54. 
Armenian  type  at  Abu  Simbel,  D  57. 
Armitage,  Miss  E.,  on  Lotus,  D  178. 
Armlets  of  gold,  Lahun,  A  98. 
Arrow  heads,  bronze,  D  40. 

flint,  B  74,  75,  124. 
Arsenic  with  copper,  B  14,  17. 
Art  in  Egypt,  character  of,  B  4,  C  71. 

„  intrusive,  C  192. 

„  Maspero,  G.,  A  86. 

„  peculiar,  B  84. 

„  representing  distance, 

C73- 
„  styles      of      predynastic, 

D  30,  31. 
Art  in  recurring  periods,  C  72. 
Artists'  signatures,  A  132. 
Asa,  king  of  Vth  dynasty,  A  80. 
Ash  wood,  C  34. 

„  =  Abies,  D  126. 

Ashtoreth  and  Hathor,  D  1 19. 
Asi,  land  of,  A  178. 
Asia,  early  relations  with,  C  89. 
Aspelut,  A  175. 

„         pyramid  of,  D  172. 
„         statue  of,  D  137. 
stele  of,  D  n. 
Assa,  blue  glazed  cylinder,  B  26. 
Astarte  scarab,  B  1 74. 
Ast-khebt,  B  25. 
Astronomer,  statue  of,  D  125. 
Aswan  tombs,  C  37. 
Asylum  privilege,  B  57,  58. 
Atargatis  Bethennunis,  D  89. 
Aten  hymn,  B  26. 
„     movement      against       priesthood, 

B  141. 
„     period,  ushabtis  of,  C  158. 
Athenaeum,  subject  index,  C  92. 


Athenaeus,  garlands  of  lotus,  D  13. 
Athene  head,  Oxyrhynchite,  B  I  lO. 
Atlanersa,  temple  of,  D  173. 
Atlantis  discussed,  D  174. 
Atmu,  shrine  of,  D  146. 
Auotesneit,  B  •j'i. 
Aurelius,  coin  of,  in  burial,  B  6. 

„        statue  of,  C  21. 

„        Apollonius,  B  187. 

„        Basileus,  D  122. 

„        B.  Juncinus,  D  122. 

„        M.  Diogenes,  D  123. 

„        Theodotus,  D  123. 
Aurignacian  flints,  B  70-72,  124,  125. 

„  settlement,  B  71. 

Autran,  Egyptian  morals,  C  20. 
Auxiliary  form,  C  79. 
Avignon,  monuments  at,  A  36. 
Axe,  double,  of  iron,  B  21. 
Ay  shrine,  B  24. 
„    Xllth  dynasty  stele,  D  171. 


Ba,  the  ram-god,  A  6^,  68,  70. 

Baboon  of  Tehuti  in  Sinai,  A  11. 

Babat,  B  181. 

Babylon,  king  of,  C  i. 

Baggy  dress,  Cretan  and  Egyptian,  B  3 1 . 

Bakennefi,  D  127. 

Bakt,  D  129. 

Balance  beams  represented,  B  38. 

Ball,  John,  Geographv'  and  Geology  of 

Sinai,  D  90. 
Ballod,    Franz,   Dwarf-gods   of    Egypt, 

B  85. 
Bamboo  not  in  Egypt,  B  141. 
Bankruptcy  leading  to  divorce,  D  90. 
Barques,  housing  and  transport,  D  71. 
Barsanti,  A.,  Work  at  temple  of  Sety  I, 

C  39- 
„  Work     at     Kom     Ombo, 

C39. 
Work  at  Philae,  D  128. 

Barton,  Mr.  H.,  A  46. 
Basket  trap,  A  168. 
Baskets  of  Bisharin,  C  45. 
Bassaeus,  Rufus,  prefect,  C  18. 
Bassus,  inscription  of,  C  18. 
Bastet  worshipped  in  Italy,  B  184. 
Bata,  heart  of  A  135. 


Index. 


Bates,  Oric,  the  Eastern  Libyans,  A  i8i. 
„  Burials  at    Marsa    Matruh, 

B  158. 
Baths  at  Meroe,  A  176. 
Beads,  repolished  for  sale,  A  85. 
Beb,  biography  of,  C  166. 

„     sarcophagus  of,  A  162. 
Beb-names,  B  78. 
Bebi,  C  16. 

Bedstead,  hota,  C  80.  V, 

Beer  offerings,  A  122. 
Behbit  temple,  A  38. 
Beheading  the  dead,  A  117. 
Behu,  dog  named,  B  27. 
Behudet,  origin  of,  D  no. 

„         worship  of,  D  109. 
Beja  type,  B  84,  C  43. 
B6nedite,  M.,  on  Ivory  handle,  D  26. 
Bequest  of  estates,  C  1 6. 
Bera,  scribe,  gold  square,  A  4. 
Berber  language,  A  182. 
Bersheh  coffin  texts,  B  183,  D  78. 
Bes,  origin  of,  D  "](>. 
„    study  of,  B  85. 
Besenmut,  B  181. 
Biblical  papyri  described,  D  133. 
Bibliographical       inscriptions      outside 

tombs,  B  140. 
Bilgai  stele,  A  130. 
Birds  in  Egyptian  art,  B  i. 
Birmingham  Museum,  bust  from,  A  48. 
Birth  expressed  as  transformation,  C  79. 
Biscuit  ware  of  Sudan,  A  145. 
Bisharin,  C  45. 
Bismuth  in  copper,  B  14,  17. 
Bissing,  F.  von,  on  Aten  hymn,  B  26. 

„  Kultur         des        Alten 

Aegypten,  A  86. 
„  Model  mummy,  A  131. 

„  Silversmiths'        models, 

A  112. 
.  „  Steles  of  Graz,  A  14. 

„  Tombs  of  Aswan,  C  37. 

Black  incised  pottery,  A  loi,  178,  C  88. 
Blackden,  M.  W.,  Ritual  of  the  Judgment, 

B46. 
Blackman,A.M.,A45;  on  Censers,  A  132. 
„  Incense  and  libations  in 

ritual,  A  132. 
„  on  Nesut,  D  85. 


Blackman,  A.  M.,  Tombs  of  Meir,  B  84, 

C  43.  88. 
Blanchard,  R.  H.,  cylinders  of,  B  78. 
Blowpipe  for  furnace,  A  33. 
Blue  colour,  A  1 86. 

Blum,  Gustave,  Ptolemaic  portraits,  D  73. 
Boat,  ceremonial,  at  Lisht,  B  147. 
„     for  the  dead,  A  24,  B  7. 
„     names  in  Egypt,  B  1 37. 
„     painting  prehistoric,  A  33,  34. 
„     of  the  sun,  A  24,  28. 
Book  of  the  Dead,  A  29. 
Book  of  traversing  eternity,  B  26. 
Boomerang,  Babylonian,  A  189. 
Borchardt,  Dr.,  A  45. 

„  Excavations  at  Amarna, 

D  140. 
Borders,  polychrome,  C  169. 
Boston  Museum,  A  189. 
Boussac,    P.  H.,  Bast  worship  in  Italy, 
B  184. 
„  Nile      in      Herodotus. 

B  184. 
Bowls,  bronze,  D  41. 
Bracelets,  bronze,  Syria,  D  41. 

„         of  gold,  Lahun,  A  98. 
Brahma  on  lotus,  D  10. 
Breasted,  J.  H.,  "  Ancient  Times,"  D  86. 
„  and    American    Branch, 

C94. 
„  Religious     thought     in 

Egypt,  A  42. 
Breccia,  Dr.,  B  57. 

„  Alexandria     catalogue,     B 

188,  C  21. 
Brewer's  model,  B  7. 
Broadwood,  Bertha,  on  Cutting  granite. 

C  113. 
Bronze,  earliest,  B  17. 

„        spread  in  Mediterranean,  B  35. 
„        sword  of  Sety  II,  A  131. 
Brugsch  Pasha,  A  93. 
Brundisianus,  M.  Marcus,  D  123. 
Brunton,   Guy,    A  191,  B  95,  144,   191, 
C  187,  D  143- 
„  Excavations  at   Lahun, 

A  49,  97,  102. 
Brussels    Museum,   limestone   head   at, 

B  144. 
Bubastite  kings,  D  83. 


Index. 


S 


Bucranion,  A  164. 

„  to  protect  trees,  B  88. 

Buddha  on  lotuSj  D  10. 
Building  methods  of  floors,  C  169. 
Bull  fights,  place  for,  B  24. 
god,  A  163. 
legs  to  coucheS;  A  1 38. 
nomes,  A  7. 

skulls  hung  up,  A  164,  B  88. 
worship,  C  166. 
Bunt,  Cyril,  Mother  and  Child  statuette, 

B  154. 
Burchardt,  Max,  Names  of  Hyksos,  A  81. 
„  Bronze  swords,  A  131. 

Heart  of  Bata,  A  135. 
„  Seqenen-Ra  kings, 

A  136. 
„  Matlire-shamo,     Mithra 

hears,  A  136. 
„  Hapy-ya,  A  136. 

„  Satuna,  B  91. 

Burial,  contracted,  A  1 17. 
„       XVIIIth  dynasty,  B  7. 
„        Hittite,  in  jars,  A  173. 
„       Hittite,  under  houses,  A  173. 
„       of  Libyans,  A  184. 

Libyan  at  Marsa  Matruh,  B  158. 
Old  Kingdom,  B  7. 
position  in  graves  constant,  A  20. 
„       in  recess,  A  1 19. 
„       of  Roman  Age,  B  6. 
Burke,  Emily,  The  Shining  East,  B  190. 
Burnt  offering  on  high  place,  D  106. 
Bushire,  excavations  at,  D  96. 
Butcher,  E.  L.,  Early  forms  of  cross,  C  97. 
Butler-Stoney,  T.  B.,  death  of,  D  142. 
Button,  Philip,  B  95. 
Button  seal  burial,  A  102. 

„  source  of,  C  90. 

Byzantine  table  of  fractions,  A  52. 


Caduceus  and  snake-god,  D  72. 
Calvisius,  G.  Statianus,  D  122. 
Cairo,  monuments  in,  A  36. 
„      Old,  mounds  of,  D  74. 
Calcite  hillocks  in  desert,  B  128. 
Caldecott,  W.  S.,  Synthetic  studies,  A  92. 
Calendar  of  Church,  C  42. 
„  Ptolemaic,  C  163. 


Calice,  Graf  F.,  uou  soldier,  C  79. 

„  liota  bedstead,  C  80. 

Campbell,   Colin,    Miraculous    birth    of 
Amenhetep  III,  A  141. 

Campion,  Rev.  C.  T.,  A  45. 

Candles  used  in  Egypt,  B  141. 

Cannibalism,  pre-Osirian,  A  18. 

Canopic  jars,  Lahun,  A  99. 

three  male,  one  female,  B  7. 

Capacity  measures  represented,  B  39. 

Capart,  Jean,   So-called    Hyksos  monu- 
ments, C  188. 

Capitals,  lotiform,  D  17,  18. 

Capitan,  Dr.,  Prehistoric  sites  in  Central 
Africa,  D  139. 

Carchemish  burials,  A  173. 

Carnarvon,  Lord,  A  143. 

Carnelian  beads,  A  4. 

Carpenter's  shop,  model,  B  7. 

Carter,  Howard,  A  46,  143,  B  i. 

„  Tomb   of    Hatshepsut, 

D  130. 

Carthaginians  take  Thebes,  B  35. 

Carton  weaving,  C  139. 

Cartouche,  earliest,  C  1 14. 

Casanowicz,  I.  M.,  Madeba  mosaic  map, 

C4S- 
Caskets  of  jewellery,  Lahun,  A  99. 
Casting  bronze,  B  14. 
Cataract,  Third,  excavations,  A  138. 
Causing  the  name  to  live,  C  153. 
Cavaignac,  E.,  Ptolemaic  calendar,  C  163. 
Cave,  skull  from,  C  94. 
Caverns  of  pluvial  age,  B  128. 
Cemetery  guard,  D  69. 

„         portal,  C  174. 
Censer  figured  in  tomb,  A  132. 
Ceremonies,  ritual  of,  D  131. 

„  in  temples,  D  71. 

Chalybes,  B  23. 

Chamber  for  offerings,  A  123,  126. 
Champagne-glass  pottery,  A  173. 
Chapel  of  tomb,  A  126. 
Character  of  Egyptians,  A  58. 
Chassinat,    E.,    Ritual    death    of   Apis, 

D85. 
Chcllean  flints,  B  59-64. 
Chenoboskion  guild,  B  57. 
Chiba,  T.,  Egyptology  in  Japan,  A  60. 
China,  Meroitic  influence  in,  A  146. 


Index. 


Chinese  eggshell  ware,  A  146. 

trade  routes,  D  137. 
Christian  literature,  early,  D  133. 
Chronology,  Vth-XIIth  dynasties,  C  88. 
Church  calendar,  C  43. 
Circumcision  in  Egypt,  A  179. 
Civilisation  egyptienne,  G.  Jequier,  A  86. 

„  of    the    Ancient    Egyptians, 

C44. 

„  spread      in      Mediterranean, 

B34. 
Civilisations  influencing  Egypt,  A  170. 
Clarke,  Somers,  A  191. 

„  Christian        antiquities, 

A  44. 
„  Granite  cutting,  C  no. 

Plan  at  Amarna,  D  141. 
Classical  patterns  in  Nigeria,  A  169. 
„         versions   of   Egyptian    writing, 
A  139. 
Claudius,  dedication  to,  B  90. 
Cleaning  of  bronzes,  D  174. 
Cledat,  Jean,  Objects  from  Isthmus,  B28, 
184. 
„  Inscriptions  of  St.  Simeon, 

B  185. 
„  Sheykh  Zoweydeh  mosaic, 

c  37. 

„  Necropolis     of      Qantara, 

D  84. 
„  Khurbetel-Klusiyeh,D  125. 

Cleopatra,  Life  and  Times,  B  41. 
Clepsydras,  D  42. 
Climate,    changes    in     Central    Africa, 

D  140. 
Cloth  offering,  A  123. 
Clothing  as  endowment,  D  39. 
Cloths,  Coptic,  B  142. 
Cobcrn,  C.  M.,  Discoveries  bearing  on 

New  Testament,  D  133. 
Coinage,  compulsory  circulation  of,  D  88. 
„         degradation  of,  A  177. 
„         Ptolemaic  hoarded,  D  87. 
„         under  Romans,  A  177. 
Coins  at  Alexandria,  B  189. 
Colossi   erected  before    building   pylon, 

C  34- 
Colouring  in  Egyptian  art,  B  1-5. 

„         of  tomb,  B  7 
Combe,  ttienne,  Arabic  epitaphs,  D  70. 


Compound  names  of  gods,  C  153. 
Concrete  expression  of  qualities,  A  56. 
Cone  worn  on  head,  A  168. 
Confession  of  wrong  not  known,  A  28,  58. 
Congar,  St.,  from  the  East,  C  65. 
Consecration  crosses,  Coptic,  C  62. 
Constantine's  vision,  C  102. 
Contract  for  offerings,  D  38. 
Contracts  of  sale,  Ptolemaic,  A  37,  38, 

41,  82,  83. 
Contracted  burial,  A  117,  B  189. 
Cook,  Sir  Fred.,  Collection,  D  62. 

„      Stanley,    Palestine     place-names, 
B  86. 
Copper  beaters,  B  14. 

„       coin,  weights  of,  A  177. 

„       history  of,  in  Egypt,  B  12. 

knives  and  razors,  Lahun,  A  99. 
Coptic  arks  for  Eucharist,  C  54. 

„      churches,  A  44,  C  56. 

„      cloths,  B  142. 

,.      corban,  C  62. 

„      forgeries,  C  20. 

„      and  Greek  steles,  C  39. 

„      Old  Testament  MSS.,  D  70. 

„      pottery  stands,  B  27. 

„      ritual,  C  55. 

„      Saidic  fragments,  C  80. 

„      sermon,  B  9. 
Co-regencies,  C  118,  182. 
Cores  of  flint  working,  B  71,  72. 
Corn  exported  to  Greece,  C  42. 

„     from  mummies,  A  78. 
Corvee  exemptions,  D  87. 
Couyat,  J.,  and  P.  Montet,  Hammamat 

inscriptions,  A  90. 
Cowper,  H.  S.,  statue  in  collection,  D  146. 
Cowry-shell  collar  of  gold,  A  98. 
Cretan  pottery,  A  loi. 

„       prehistoric  age,  B  29. 

„       statuette,  B  49. 

„       long  neolithic  age,  B  30. 
Cris-cross  pattern  on  flint,  B  122. 
Crocodile  of  Neit,  B  80. 

„         shrine  in  Fayum,  B  57. 
„         worship  of,  D  1 17. 
Cross,  American,  C  io8. 

„      early  forms,  C  97. 

„      Mykenaean  emblem,  C  105. 

„      pre-Christian,  C  164. 


Index. 


Crowns,  magical  powers  of,  D  147. 
Cubit  rods  from  Dendereh,  D  128. 
Currency  under  ^mans,  A  177. 
Cyclades,  prehistoric,  B  31. 
Cylinder  seals  of  Elam,  D  34. 
Cylinders  with  animal  heads,  A  113. 

„        earliest  inscriptions,  A  61,  B  78. 

„         of  glazed  potter}-,  B  26. 
Cyperus  papyrus,  D  6. 
Cypriote  objects  not  in  Egypt,  A  178. 
Cyprus,  copper  from,  B  12. 
„        prehistoric,  B  32. 

Da-ast-hebu,  B  25. 
Daggers,  Hittite,  A  174. 

„         Keftian  and  Hyksos,  A  172. 
„        ribbed  and  flat,  B  32. 
Sudani  type,  C  87. 
Dances,  sacred,  C  76. 
Daninos  Pasha,  A  46. 
Danish  flint  work,  B  122,  124. 
Daressy,  G.,  Monuments  in  Cairo,  A  36. 
„  Inscriptions  from  Memphis, 

A  38. 
XXII-XXIVth     dynasties, 
A  37. 
„  Controller,  A  93. 

„  Stele  of  Hawara,  B  26. 

„  Priests'  seats,  B  142,  C  165. 

„  Xth  Nome,  C  20. 

„  Cylinder  of  Neferarkara,  C 

38. 
„  Old  Kingdom  stele,  C  39. 

„  Egyptian    Zodiac,   C     165, 

185. 
„  Palermo  stone,  C  1 82,  D  70. 

„  Coffin  of  Akhenaten,  C  185. 

„  Clepsydra,  D  42. 

„  Water   in    Ancient    Egypt, 

D45. 
„  Set  animals,  D  72. 

„  Bubastite  kings,  D  83. 

„  Monument  of  Hyksos  age, 

D  124. 
„  Statue  of  an  astronomer,  D 

125. 
„  Socket  of   Mer-hor-tefef,  D 

126. 
Stele    of    XI  Xth   dynasty, 
with  pyramid  text,  D  127. 


Daress)-,  G.,  Statue  with  deities  of  Men- 

des,  D  127. 
„  Son  of  Sheshenq  III,  D  127. 

„  Causeway  of  Mentuhetep  V, 

D  127. 
„  Sarcophagus  of  Tehutmes, 

D  127. 
„  Naos  of  Domitian,  D  127. 

„  Gaston  Maspero,  D  127. 

Statue  of  Shed,  D  129. 
Parents    of    Sheshenq  I,  D 

129. 
„  Scarab  of  Amenhetep  IV, 

D  129. 
,,  Necropolis    of  high   priests 

of  Heliopolis,  D  130. 
„  Inscription    of    ceremonies, 

D  131. 
„  Statue  of  Khaemuas,  D  131. 

Mastaba  of  Khufu-khaf,  D 

131- 
„  Statue  of  George  of  Tentyra, 

D  132. 
„  Names  of  Egypt,  D  139. 

„  Geography  of  Egypt,  D  176. 

Dau,  Prince,  C  166. 
Daueit,  father  of  Phoibamn,  A  54. 
Daumas,  M.,  wounded,  C  137. 
Davids,  Rhys,  history  of  religion,  C  90. 
Davies,  N.  de  G.,  A  46,  191. 

„  on   Theban   tombs,   C 

85. 
„  Architectural  sketch,  D 

21,  141. 
„  Tomb   of    Puamra,   D 

172. 
Davies,  Mrs.  Nina,  Tomb  of  Amenem- 

hat,  B  139. 
Davis,  bequest  of  antiquities,  C  84. 
Dead,  head  down,  malignant,  A  17. 
„       houses  for,  A  28. 
„       services  for,  C  17. 
Death  desired,  A  25. 
Debtor-slave,  C  19,  20. 
Decian  persecution,  D  149. 
D^chelette,  J.,  death  of,  C  47. 
Decrees  of  endowments,  D  93. 
Deer  with  branching  horns,  C  43. 
Deir  el-Abyad,  B  27. 

„       Bahri  sculptures  imitated,  C  yj 


8 


Index. 


Delta,  sinking  of,  B  184,  188,  D  45. 

„     tombs  in,  D  91. 
Demez  sign,  D  52. 

Demotic  a  translation  of  Greek,  A  82. 
Den  and  the  Palermo  stone,  A  148. 

„    various  readings  of,  A  148. 
Derketo,  D  89. 
Derry,  Dr.,  C  47,  94. 
Descent  of  custom,  A  115. 
Destruction  of  mastabas,  B  7. 

„  of  Roman  buildings,  A  38. 

Devaud,  E.,  Errors  by  scribes,  B  1 38. 
Development  of  the  language,  A  62. 
Diadem  of  Lahun,  A  98. 
Dial  with  month  lines,  B  184. 
Dionysos,  an  Egyptian  usurper,  A  82. 
Dirpu,  singer  of  Amen,  A  29. 
Disc  flints,  H  67,  68. 
Discoveries  bearing  on  New  Testament, 

D  133- 
Diseases  of  mummies,  A  138. 
Dismemberment  of  dead,  A  18,  B  141. 

„  ofhead,kept,  C  59, 151. 

Distance,  mode  of  representing,  C  73. 
Divorce  in  bankruptcy,  D  90. 
Dixon,  Lieut.  James,  death  of  B  191. 
Dodge,  Miss  T.,  C  47. 
Dog  named,  B  27. 
Dogs,  pre-dynastic,  D  29. 
Domed  pit  toirib,  A  1 19. 
Domed-top  graves,  A  1 19. 
Domitian,  naos  of,  D  127. 
Door,  bronze  casting  for,  B  28. 
Dorcas  gazelle,  D  29. 
Double  of  a  man,  B  104. 
Drag  net,  A  168. 

Drain  from  offering  chamber,  A  123. 
Drainage  round  pyramid,  A  51. 
Draught  board  with  knuckle  bones,  D 

172. 
Dream  oracle,  A  83. 
Drowned,  cult  of  the,  B  91. 
Duca,  M.  Fluminianus,  D  122. 
Ducros,  H.  A.,  Ash  wood,  C  34. 
Duen  fubara,  A  125. 
Dussaud,  Rene,  Prehellenic  civilisations, 
B  29. 

„  steles  of  Yehudiyeh,  D 

74- 
Dwarf  gods,  B  85. 


Dyes,  madder,  D  140. 
Dynasty  I,  A  5. 

I-IV,  C  114,  182. 

IV,  C  182,  184. 

V,C38.  117. 

VII-IX,  C90. 

XI,  A  81,  C  82. 

XIII,  Bc)o. 

XIII-XVII,C  167. 

XXII-XXIV,  A  37,  C  164,  D 

83- 
XXIII,  A  38. 
Dy-Neit,  A  70. 

Ea,  moon-god,  Babylonian,  A  13. 
Earliest  inscriptions,  A  61,  B  78. 
Earrings  with  balls,  D  40. 
Eckenstein,  L.,  Moon  cult  in  Sinai,  A  9. 

„  the  god  Sopt,  D  103. 

Economics,  Graeco-Roman,  from  papyri, 

A  141. 
Edgar,  C.  C,  Isis  temple  of  Behbit,  A  38. 
Building  of  Merenptah,  C 

38. 
„  Roman  inscriptions,  C  39. 

„  Tombs    at    Kom   el-Hisn, 

D  91. 
Education  of  women,  D  89. 
Edwards,  Miss  Amelia,  B  168. 
Eggshell  ware,  A  145. 
Egypt  in  Africa,  A  115,  159. 
Egypt  and  Mesopotamia,  D  26. 
Elam  earlier  than  Egypt,  D  32. 
„     invaders  from,  D  32. 
„     Solutrean  flints,  D  32. 
Elamite  style  of  art,  D  30. 
Embalming  materials,  A  180. 
Ember,  Aaron,  Egyptian  and  Semitic, 

A  133,  B9i,92. 
Embodiment,  A  188. 
Emperor  worship  in  Egypt,  D  170. 
Emseh,  A  ^6. 

Endowment  for  dead,  gods  trustees  for, 
B  140. 
„  for  statue,  D  93. 

Engelbach,  R.,  A  191,  B  47, 95,  144,  191. 
C  47,  94. 
Captain,  R.E.,  C  187. 
„  on  Harageh,  A  lOi. 

Engineering  of  antiquity,  A  140. 


Index. 


Engraving  scarabs,  method  of,  D  1 36. 

Entolmius,  F.  Tatianus,  D  123. 

Epistrategi,  C  18. 

Era,  fixed,  introdtfced,  D  88. 

Erdanefer,  B  82. 

Ergamenes  at  Meroe,  A  175. 

„  at  Philae,  A  40. 

Erman,  A.,  Negatives,  A  1 34. 

„  Saite  copies  of  sculpture,  C 

77 
„  Relative  adjectives,  C  79. 

Eros  figure,  C  50. 
Errors  of  scribes,  B  1 38. 
Esdraelon  type,  D  58. 
Eskimo  use  meteoric  iron,  D  45. 
Ethics  of  the  Egyptians,  A  55. 
Ethiopian  succession  of  kings,  D  37. 
Ethiopic  kings  of  Thebes,  A  40. 
Exodus  route,  B  86. 
„        and  Sinai,  D  95. 


Face  of  dead  turned  to  homeland,  A  19. 
Family  instinct,  necessity  of,  A  44. 
priest,  eldest  son,  A  124. 
„       unity  in  life  and  death,  C  151. 
Fate,  belief  in,  A  56. 
Fate  of  Empires  (A.  J.  Hubbard),  A  44. 
Fayum,  figure  of  Hyksos,  C  190. 

flints,  B  74,  75. 
Female  figures  in  tombs,  D  TJ. 
„       inheritance,  C  62,  115. 
Ferguson,  Dr..  on  Skull  from  cave,  C  94. 
F"ewkes,  W.,  Mexican  customs,  B  189. 
Fibulae,  bronze,  Hittite,  A  174. 

„        Syrian,  D  40. 
Firth,  Cecil,  A  93,  D  48. 
Fish  of  gold,  A  102. 
„     representing  Isis,  C  23. 
„     scaler,  of  flint,  B  124. 
Fisher,  Clarence,  A  93,  D  48. 
Flax  cultivation,  B  99. 

„      pulling,  A  26. 
Flint  utility  and  artistic  working,  B  60. 
„    -working,  artistic  quality,  B  60. 
types,  B  59,  122. 
Flints,  prehistoric,  Central  African,D  139. 
Flooring  of  houses  represented,  C  169. 
Flour  ofi'erings,  A  122. 
Flusiyeh,  Khurbet  el-,  D  125. 


Food-rents,  royal,  given  to  dead,  B  140, 

D38. 
Foreigners,  early  figures  of,  C  89. 

„  in  XlXth  dynasty,  D  57. 

Forged  documents  by  Copts,  C  20. 
Forges  of  Horus,  Duo. 
Foucart,  G.,  History  of  religion  criticised, 
A  139. 
„  Director  of  Institut  Arch^- 

blogique,  C  187. 
Foundation  deposits  at  Lisht,  B  145. 
„  „        at  Napata,  D  173. 

„  „        at  Thebes,  D  171. 

Fourtan,  R.,  Marmarica,  C  19. 
Fox,  W.  S.,  Hellenistic  tapestries,  D  140. 
Fractions,  table  of,  A  52. 
French  Egyptology,  C  15,  163,  D  69. 
Frobenius,  Leo,  Voice  of  Africa,  A  84. 
Frost,  F.  J.,  A  45,  97,  102. 
Frost,  K.  T.,  B  47. 
Frothingham,  A.  L.,  Hermes  snake-god, 

D  72. 
Fry,  Miss  Ruth,  B  95. 
Funeral  feasts,  A  41. 
„        figures,  C  isi. 
image,  A  124. 
„        offerings  granted  by  king,  B  140. 
„         rites  essential,  B  104. 
„        sacrifices,  human,  A  124. 
„        substitutes  for  mummy,  C  153. 
Funerary  system  described,  B  1 39. 
Furniture  of  Hlrd  dynasty,  B  41. 
Future  life,  belief  in,  A  16,  B  103. 
„         like  the  present,  A  162. 
„         in  world  of  potsherds,  B  104. 

Gaillard  on  domesticated  animals,  A  iSo. 

Galahad  =  Goliath,  C  63. 

Gallienus,    Alexandrian    coinage  of,    D 

152. 
Games  represented,  B  38. 
Gaming  board  from  Kahun,  B  T)!)- 

.,        reeds,  B  143. 
Garlands  of  lotus,  D  13,  178. 
Gardiner,  Dr.  Alan,  A  46. 

„  on  Ethics  of  Egyp- 

tian.s,  A  55. 
„  Steleof  Bilgai,Ai30. 

„  Old     absolute     pro- 

noun, A  135. 


lO 


Index. 


Gardiner,  Dr.  Alan,  A  political  crime, 
A  178. 

„  Notes     on      Sinuhe, 

B  24,  183. 

„  Tomb   of  Amenem- 

hat,  B  139. 

„  Story      of      Sinuhe, 

C  181. 

„  on  nesut,  D  85. 

„  and     I'ect,     Inscrip- 

tions     of     Sinai, 

D  134- 
Gardner.  Prof.  E.,  C  47. 

„  Cretan  statuette,  B  49. 

Garstang,  Prof.  J.,  Sun-god  of  Aranna, 
A  174. 
„  Excavations  at  Me- 

roe,  A  175. 
Gauthier,  H.,  Xth  nome,  A  35,  C  20. 
„  XXI  Ind  dynasty,  C  164. 

„  History  of  Ziharpo,  €165. 

„  Necropolis      of      Thebes, 

D  176. 
Geb,  earliest  god,  A  17. 

„     shrine  of,  B  90. 
Geikie,  Dr.  James,  on  Glacial  ages,  B  126. 
Gell,  Sir  William,  Reading  of  hierogly- 
phics, D  162. 
Generation,  length  of,  C  88. 
Genii,  four,  on  lotus,  D  9,  10. 
Gennep,    A.    van,    Twisted    or    carton 

weaving,  C  1 39. 
Geography  of  the  gods,  D  1 09. 
George,  W.  S.,  A  175. 
Georges,  prince  of  Tentyra,  D  132. 
Gibraltar,  changes  of  level  at,  B  126. 
Gibson,  Mr.,  A  103. 
Giraffe,  C  43. 

Gizeh,  work  at,  A  88,  C  40. 
Glacial  ages,  B  126-134. 

table  of,  B  127. 
Glass  blowing,  not  early,  A  33. 
„      hair  pin,  oldest,  D  172. 
„      variegated  Cumaean,  D  42. 
Glastonbury,  settlement  of  hermits,  C  66. 
Glazed  pottery,  Nubian,  C  87. 
Goat  handle  of  vase,  A  1 1 2. 
Gods  eaten  by  the  dead,  A  1 8. 
„     geography  of  the,  D  109. 
„     of  Libya,  A  184. 


Gods  names  compounded,  C  153. 

„     as  trustees  of  endowments,  B  140.^ 
Gold  found  in  excavations,  B  15. 

„     jewellery,  A  3,  4,  97. 

XXth-XXVth  dynasty, 
C83. 

„     sent  by  Rome  to  East,  D  138. 

„     working,  B  14. 
Golden-headed  vulture,  B  i. 
Golenichefir,   W.,  Racial   types   at   Abu 

Simbel,  D  57. 
Goliath,  Galahad,  C  63. 
Good  name,  an  object,  A  56. 
Gorringc  collection,  B  182,  C  49. 
Gosse.  A.  B.,  Civilisation  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, C  44. 
Grail  Romance,  C  i,  54,  186. 
Granary  models,  B  7. 
Granite  cutting,  C  iio,  143. 

„       hall  at  Abydos,  A  103. 
Grapes,  red  and  white,  A  38. 
Grapow,  A.,  Nile  hymn,  C  79. 
Grater,  bronze,  D  40. 
Gravels  on  top  of  cliff,  B  130. 
Graves  domed  over,  A  1 1 9. 
Graz,  steles  at,  A  14. 
Grenfell,  Alice,  Ka  on  .scarabs,  B  185. 
„  Grenfell  scarabs,  C  22. 

„  Death  of,  D  142. 

Grenfell,    Prof,     O.xyrhynchus    papyri, 

C  40,  D  87. 
Griffith,  F.  LI.,  Nubian  texts,  A  139. 
Ground  loom,  A  167. 
Guardian  Spirit,  B  103. 
Gunn,  Battiscombe,  A  45,  102,  191 


Hadrian,  dedication  by,  B  187. 
Hair  rings,  golden,  A  4. 
Hakar  shrine,  B  27. 

Halikarna.ssos,  List  of  priests  in,  A  178. 
Hall,  H.  R.,  Ancient  history  of  near  East, 
A  90. 
Land  of  Alashiya,  A  178. 
Aegean  chronology,  B  36. 
Hamada,    K.,     Egyptology    in     Japan, 

A  59. 
Hambley,  Mr.,  C  47. 
Hammamat  inscriptions,  A  90. 
Hand  sign  and  words,  A  1 33. 


Index. 


II 


Handles  of  vases,  A  ii2. 

with     animal      heads, 
A  113. 
Hapi  figures,  C  ^89. 

„  with  lotus,  D  7,  8. 

Hapt  C  183. 

Hapy,  woman,  stele,  D  171. 
Haqerut,  D  126. 
Haremheb,  A  142. 
Haridi,  Shekh,  shrine  at,  B  90. 
Harpocrates,  figures  of,  C  49. 
Harpoon,  A  168,  B  124. 

„  nome,  A  6. 

Harris  Magic  Papyrus,  D  69. 
Harvest  scenes,  A  96. 
Hasehetept,  A  35. 
Hat,  tall,  of  priests,  A  126. 
Hathor  and  Athirat,  Ashtoreth,  D  1 19. 
of  Cusae  and  Roant,  D  131. 
„       head  on  mirror,  Lahun,  A  99, 
C87. 
the  great  Mother,  A  22. 
„       sistrum  players  and  singers,  D  91. 
„       worship  of,  D  1 14. 
„       worshipped  in  Sinai,  A  9,  D  104. 
Hatshepsut,  burials  of  age  of,  D  172. 
„  mother  of,  B  loi. 

„  tomb  at  Thebes,  D  1 30. 

Hawk,  coloring  of,  B  2. 

two  on  standards  of  Atmu,  B  26. 
Hay,  A  107. 
Hayt  (Bes),  B  85. 
Hayter,  A.,  B  6,  47,  144,  191. 
Head  kerchiefs,  D  92. 
„      rests,  A  166,  B  142. 
„      modelled  for  tomb,  A  125,  C  40, 
151. 
removed  and  kept,  A  117,  C  59, 
151. 
Heads  of  animals  in  grave,  A  138. 

„       modelled  in  pottery,  A  85,  169. 
Heart  of  Bata,  A  135. 

„       scarab  with  human  face,  D  172. 
Hekasen,  B  78. 
Hekhtiu,  D  39. 

Heliopolis  centre  of  Ra  worship,  A  21. 
in  Vlth  dynasty,  A  88. 
„  tombs  of  high  priests,  D  130. 

Helmets,  early,  B  12. 
Henena,  god,  B  78. 


Henka  function,  C  17. 

Hepzefa  tomb,  C  74,  86. 

Heracleopolite  nome,  tree  of,  A  132. 

Heracles  wrestling,  C  50. 

Here  and  there,  words  for,  A  124. 

Heremheb,  C  35. 

pylon  of,  C  34. 
Herm-Anubis,  B  112. 
Hermes  snake-god,  caduceus,  D  72. 

-Thoth,  B  112. 
Hermetic  writings,  A  30. 
Hermine,  Ermonies,  C  11. 
Hermopolis  tokens,  B  112. 
Hero  with  lions,  D  28. 
Hershef-nekht,  A  102. 
Hertz,  Amelie,  Ceremonies  of  fresh  reign, 

B  27. 
Hesunebf,  A  106. 
Hesy,  panels  of,  B  48. 

tomb  of,  B  37. 
Hetep  offering,  A  123. 
Hetep  da  nesut  formula,  B  139. 
Hez  crown  reading  su,  C  25. 
Hez-hctep,  god,  A  I02. 
Hieraconpolis,  ships  of,  D  28,  35. 
Hieratic  ostraka,  A  106. 
Hinge  of  modern  form,  D  172. 
Hippopotamus,  sacrifices  to,  A  164. 
Hisn,  Tombs  at  Kom  el-,  D  91. 
Hisopis,  A  35. 

History  continuous  in  Egypt,  A  i. 
Hittite  burial  customs,  A  173. 

shields,  C  135. 

sun-god,  A  174. 

type  at  Abu  Simbel,  D  58. 
Hittites,  end  of,  C  32. 
Hoarding  of  coin,  D  87. 
Hoe,  natural  and  compound,  A  166. 
Hoehne,  G.,  Saidic  fragments,  C  80. 
Hogarth,  Mr ,  D  48. 
Hon  measures,  B  40. 
Honeferatu,  D  127. 
Hooked  sticks,  B  189. 
Hoof  flints,  B  67-69. 
Hor,  son  of  Mentuemhat,  A  41. 

„     son  of  Zad-tehuti-au-onkh,  D  128. 
Hora,  A  37. 

Hora polio  Papyrus,  C  164. 
Hor-aa-khuti  worshipped,  A  14,  37. 
Horbeyt,  plant  of,  D  1 30. 


12 


Index. 


Hor-em-aakhuti,  Ethiopic  king,  A  40, 83. 
Hor-hotep,  D  126. 
Hor-khred-meh,  A  37. 
Hor-merti,  A  41. 
Hornakht,  A  38. 
Hor-nesa,  A  73. 

Horns  artificially  twisted,  C  125. 
„       on  head  of  Sneferu,  A  12. 
Hornubti  title,  C  182. 
Horsa-ast,  King,  A  38. 
A  37,  B  25. 
Horsebit,  D  40. 
Horses,  Libyan,  A  183. 

„       on  tomb  scene,  B  8. 
Horta,  D  126. 

Horus,  Italian  bust  of,  D  175. 
„       from  Libyan  aiau,  D  117. 
„       lock  of  on  cross,  C  104. 
on  the  lotus,  D  8,  9. 
names  of  1st  dynasty,  A  5. 
Horus  and  Set,  conflict  of,  A  35. 
Horuza  son  of  Harua,  D  128. 
Hotcp,  queen  of  Mena,  A  6,  155. 
Hough,  Walter,  Culture  of  Pueblos,  B 

143- 
Hours  not  varying  with  seasons,  D  45. 

Howe,  Mr.,  A  93. 

Hubbard,  A.  J.,  Fate  of  Empires,  A  44. 

Hudet,  source  of,  D  118. 

„       worship  of,  D  1 10. 
Human  sacrifice  at  funeral,  A  124,  C  74, 

86. 
Huni,  King,  C  78. 
Hunt,  Prof  A.  S.,  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri, 

C  40. 
Hunure,  A  ic6. 
Huy,  A  37,  D  127. 
Hyksos  monument,  D  124. 

„        monuments,  so-called,  C  188. 

„        names,  Semitic,  A  81. 
pottery,  A  loi,  C  88. 

„        tombs  at  Third  Cataract,  A  138. 
Hym'n  to  Death,  A  25. 

„     to  Mut,  A  108. 

„      to  Nut,  earliest,  A  17. 
Hypnotic  action,  H  142. 

Illahun,  see  Lahun. 
Image  at  funeral,  A  124. 
Imhctcp,  Prince,  at  Lisht,  H  146. 


Imhetep,  worship  of,  C  42. 
Im-thepy,  A  88. 

Incarnation,  A.  Wiedemann,  A  188. 
Incense,  dew  of  the  god,  A  132. 

„        and  libations  in  ritual,  A  132. 
Incised  black  pottery,  A  10 1,  178,  C  88. 
Indian  influence  in  Egypt,  A  30,  31. 
twined  serpents,  D  33,  34. 

„       use  of  lotus,  D  2. 
Individual  religion,  A  29,  30. 
Indo-PLuropean  entry  to  Mediterranean, 

B34- 
Industrial  results  from  papyri,  A  141. 
Infant  sacrifice  (?)  in  sealed  box,  A  100. 
Influence   of  Egypt   on   the   East   and 

America,  C  141. 
Intercessors,  C  35,  164. 
Interregnum,  B  28. 

Interwoven  patterns  in  Nigeria,  A  169. 
Invaders,  gradual  infiltration  of,  D  35. 
Iron,  antiquity  of,  B  190. 

„     earliest,  B  18. 

„     history  of  in  Egypt,  B  20. 

„     meteoric,  used,  D  45. 

„     sources  of,  B  22. 

„     bronze  cast  upon,  B  22. 

„  working  in  Kordofan,  A  178. 
Isabella  or  the  Pot  of  Basil,  C  151. 
Isis,  bust  of,  C  49. 

„    cities  of  worship,  C  41. 

„    emblem,  lotus  fruit,  D  9. 

„    figure,  C  50. 

„    in  Italy,  B  184. 

„    ritual,  C  41. 

„    shrine  of,  A  36. 
Isis-Hekate,  triple-faced,  B  108. 
Ivory  carvings,  pie- dynastic,  D  26. 

„      caskets,  Lahun,  A  99. 

„      and  gold  statuette,  Cretan,  B  49. 

Jachin  and  Boaz,  D  118 
Japan,  Egyptology  in,  A  59. 

„      use  of  lotus  in,  D  4. 
J^quier,  G.,  Egyptian  civilisation,  A  86. 
„  Monuments    at    Spalato,    A 

179. 
„  Twisted  or  carton   weaving, 

C  139- 
„  on  onkh,  C  164. 

„  on  panther's  head,  D  76. 


Index. 


13 


J^quier,  G.,  Thueris,  D  76. 

,,  Spirit  of  dead,  D  TJ. 

Origin  of  Bes,  D  76. 
Sinai  artd  the  Exodus,  D  95. 
Jeremiah,  Coptic  saint,  church  of,  C  100. 
Jewellery,  inlaid,  A  3. 

„         of  Lahun,  A  97. 
„  of  Riqqeh,  A  3. 

Jewish  influence  in  Egypt,  A  30. 
„      literature,  D  1 34. 
steles,  D  74. 
Johnson,  J.  de  M.,  A  45,  93,  143. 
Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  Negro  head,  C  144. 
Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  C  i,  12. 
Judgement,  belief  in,  A  24. 

by  Osiris,  A  25-27. 
„  scenes  of  weighing,  A  27. 

Julianus,  Claudius,  D  122. 
Julius  Caesar,  aims  of,  B  44. 
Julius,  Claudius,  D  122. 
Julius,  F.  Ammonius,  D  123. 
Julius  Lupus,  prefect,  B  184. 
Juncinus,  Baebius,  D  87. 

K,  see  Q. 

Ka,  action  of,  A  22,  67. 
,,    communion  with,  A  132. 
„    fanning  the  king,  A  23. 
„    on  scarabs,  B  185. 
.,    the  spirit  of  the  family,  A  24,  162. 
„    theory  of,  A  22  ;  see  B  103. 
Kau,  plural,  vital  force,  A  180. 
Ka-statues,  so-called,  A  125,  C  152. 
Ka,  King,  C  75. 
Kahers,  A  74. 

Kamal,  Ahmed,  Tombs  of  Meir,  D  124. 
„  Plundering  of  Dronka, 

D  127. 
„  „  of    Dimeh, 

D  130. 
Kamara,  Queen,  A  26,  43. 
Kamares  pottery,  A  loi. 
Kanebneit,  B  78. 
Ka-nefer-uah,  B  186. 
Kare,  A  66. 

Karimat,  title  of  queens,»C  70. 
Kay  ay,  D  64. 

Kees,  Hermann,  Perdtiat  and  zebt,  B  24. 
„  Rock  shrineat  Akhmim, 

B  24. 


Kees,  Hermann,  Memphite  gods,  B  185. 

„  Sacred  dances,  C  76. 

Keftiu  people,  A  172. 
Kem  nefert,  C  17. 
Kerchiefs  for  head,  D  92. 
Karma  excavations,  A  1 38,  C  74,  86. 
Ketis  region  of  Hittites,  C132. 
Khaemuas,  statue  of,  D  131. 
Khafra,  cylinder,  B  82. 

„       throne  with  lotus,  D  6. 
Kharu,  son  of  Pa-un-nekhti,  B  27. 
Khensu,  origin  of,  D  1 17. 
„         statuette  of,  D  1 20. 
„         worship  of,  D  1 12. 
Kher-heb,  ceremonial  of  the,  A  1 18. 
Kherp,  pre-dynastic,  D  26. 
Khesebui,  Khensu  lord  of  time, "A  130. 
Khesu-ur,  D  91. 
Khet=  things,  B  186. 
Khety  Ranebkau,  A  1 36. 
Khi-rho  monogram,  C  102. 
Khnem,  worship  of,  D  11 2. 
Khnem-enta,  A  88. 
Khnemu-khufu  in  Sinai,  A  10. 
Khosekhemui,  Set  name  of,  A  5. 
Khufu  cylinder,  B  26,  168. 

smiting  the  Anu,  C  89. 
Khu-fu-khaf  mastaba,  D  131. 
Khu-ne-her,  high-priest,  D  131. 
Khutari-ra,  C  87. 
Killed  offerings,  A  123,  B  189. 
King,  W.  J.  H.,at  Marsa  Matruh,  B  158. 

„  Oases  customs,  B  87. 

King  killed  before  old  age,  A  1 59. 
„     married  sisters,  A  160. 
„     as  priest,  A  159. 
„     acts  for  the  country,  A  57. 
King's  death  only  hinted,  A  160. 

„      names  compounded  for  persons, 

A  80. 
„      placenta  honoured,  A  161. 
Kings  of  the  East,  B  183. 
Klebs,    Luise,    Representation    of    dis- 
tances in  scenes,  C  j},. 
Knight,  A.  E.,  Amentet,  C  44. 
Knives  of  copper,  XHth  dynasty,  C  87. 
„      of  flint,  B  74,  75,  77. 
„      of  iron,  early,  B  21,  22. 
Knoche,  G.  The  gift  of  Antiquity  to  Art* 
C  91. 

N 


14 


Inde.\ 


Knuckle  bones  used  in  games,  D  172. 
Kohl  pot,  ape,  A  4. 
Kom  Ishgau,  A  35. 

Koptos,  antiquities  from,  A  139,  B  192. 
„        importance  of  trade  routes,  D 

'37- 
„        sculpture  of  Ptolemy  I,  D  167. 
Kordofan,  prehistoric  site  in,  D  39. 
Kuentz,  C,  Sundial,  D  83. 
Kultur  des  alten  Aegypten  (v.  Bissing), 
A  86. 

Labarum,  C  99,  102. 

Lacau,  P.,  Notes  on  Grammar,  A  37. 

„  Mutilated  signs,  B  89. 

„  Coffin  texts  of  Bersheh,  B  183, 

D  78. 

„  at  the  war,  D  48. 

Ladder  to  the  sky,  A  19,  D  119. 
Lagier,  C,  Travels,  A  138. 
Lahun  excavations,  A  49,  97. 
Lake  north  of  Temple  of  Amen,  D  1 29. 
Lakshmi  and  Lotus,  D  10. 
Lamp  with  water  chamber,  B  31. 
Lamps  figured  in  tomb,  B  38. 
Lamp-wicks  of  lotus  stem,  D  4. 
Latin  will,  C  17,  18. 
Laurie,  A.  P.,  Egyptian  blue,  A  186. 
Laver  base,  B  182. 
Law,  New,  on  Antiquities,  A  128. 
Lawrence,  Mr.,  in  Cairo,  D  48. 

„  Lieut.,  C  94. 

Lazuli,  source  of,  C  89. 
Lead,  alloyed  with  copper,  B  17. 
„      history  of,  in  Egypt,  V>  16. 
Leaden  tokens  from  Memphis,  B  107. 
Leconfield  collection,  D  175. 
Lefebvre,  G.,  Coptic  and  Greek  steles, 

C  39- 
at  Asyut,  U  48. 
Legrain,  G.,  Mentuemhat  family,  A  41,  B 
24,  181. 
.     *,„  Pylon  of  Horemheb,  C  34. 

„  Notes  on  Mentu,  C  166. 

„  Sacred    barks    and   statues, 

D  7r. 
„  Prophet  of  Up-uat-mes,    D 

124. 
,, ,      „  Litany  of  Uazet,  D  124. 

„  Goddess  Shahdidyt,  D  124. 


Legrain,  G.,  Statuette  of  Hor,  D  128. 

„  Cubit  rods,  D  128. 

„  Statuette  of  Horuza,  D  1 28. 

„  Polish  on  statues,  D  128. 

„  Oracle  of  Aohmes  I,  D  128. 

„  Thebes-Uaset,  D  128. 

„  Lake  north  of  Amen,  D  128. 

„         Death  of,  D  142. 
Lehmann  -  Haupt,     C.     F.,     girdle     of 

Rameses  III,  A  174. 
Leopard  skin  worn  by  king's  sons,  A  161. 
Leontopolis  lion  stele,  B  182. 
Letopolis,  ensign  of,  D  28. 
Letters    in    XVIIlth-XIXth    dynasty, 

D97- 
Level  of  sea,  changes  of,  B  1 26- 1 34. 
Levels  in  Nile  valley,  B  128. 
Libelli,  proofs  of  paganism,  D  134,  149. 
Libya,  races  in,  A  181. 
Libyan  burials,  B  1 58. 
Libyans,  Eastern,  A  181. 
Lily-lake  which  dead  pass  over,  A  2 1 . 
Lion  of  Hierakonpolis,  C  189,  190. 
Lion  of  cold  country,  D  28,  35. 
Lion-god  stele,  B  182. 
Lion-head  collar,  A  98. 
Lions  of  gold,  Lahun,  A  98. 
Lions,  winged,  by  throne,  A  36. 
Lisht,  excavations  at,  B  145. 
Local  administration  in  Old  Kingdom, 

D  139. 
Loom  on  ground,  A  167. 

„      model,  B  7. 
Looms,  A  140. 
Loret,  v..  Sign  of  sundial,  \)  83. 

„         Keeper   of  cattle,   birds,  and 

fish,  D  85. 
„         The  tree  ash,  D  1 26. 
Lotus,  Dr.  Spanton  on  the,  D  i. 

Miss  E.  Armitage  on,  D  178. 

species,  D  2. 

bread,  D  4. 

-eaters,  D  5. 

artistic  adaptation,  D  6. 

in  religion,  D  9. 

fruit  emblem  of  Isis,  D  9. 

in  daily  life,  D  10. 

in  formal  ornament,  D  15 

Horus  on  the,  D  8.  9. 

and  four  genii,  D  9. 


i 


Index. 


15 


Lotus,  type  of  creative  power,  D  10. 
„      and  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Buddha, 
D  10. 
swathing  tnfe  dead,  D  10. 
fans,  D  II. 
as  headdress,  D  1 1 . 
worn  at  feasts,  D  11 . 
white,  D  2,  8,  12,  17,  18,  20. 
with  rehgious  offerings,  D  12. 
garlands  on  mummies,  D  13. 
vase,  D  14. 
capitals,  D  17,  18. 
seed  vessel,  D  2,  20. 
Lucian,  Account  of  ushabtis,  C  154. 
Lucretius  Clemens,  will  of,  C  18. 
Lunate  flints,  B  67,  68. 
Lycian  guard,  D  69. 
Lynch,  Hon.  J.,  death  of,  D  143. 
Lyn.\  or  serval,  D  30. 
Lyre  from  Thebes,  D  172. 
Lythgoe,  Dr.,  A  46,  B  47. 

„  Excavations   at    Lisht,  B 

145. 
„  Excavations  at  Thebes,  D 

171. 

Mace,  A.  C,  A  45,  93,  B  47,  191. 
Mace  heads,  carved,  D  30. 

„  compound,  D  33. 

Macgregor  collection,  A  61. 
Mackay,  Mr.,  A  46,  93,  191. 

„  Report  on  Thcban  Tombs, 

C36. 
„  Polychrome     borders,     C 

169. 
„  in  Camel  Corps,  C  187. 

Macrianus,  coinage  of,  D  i  57. 
Madder  dyes,  D  140. 
Madeba  mosaic  map,  C  45. 
Mafdet,  goddess,  A  66,  70,  B  85. 
Magdalenian  flint  work,  B  122. 
Magic  Papyrus,  D  69 
Magical  power  of  crowns,  D  147. 

value  of  tomb  scenes,  B  140. 
Mahmal,  original,  B  87. 
Manchester  Museum  Guide,  C  46. 
„  „  Report,  C  89. 

„  Oriental  Society,  C  89. 

Manetho,  A  32,  39,  40,  C  38,  1 17. 
Maot-kheru,  D  84. 


Maot  Goddess  of  Truth,  A  22. 

meaning  of,  A  55. 
Maps   of  land    in   glacial   ages,   B    133, 

134- 
Map  of  Palestine  mosaic,  C  45. 
Marestaing,    P.,    Classical    accounts    of 

Egyptian  writing,  A  139. 
Marmaric  coast,  C  19. 
Marriage  of  daughter,  A  131. 
Marsa  Matruh,  B  158. 
Marseilles  Museum,  B  i8i,  183. 
Marsyas  bronze,  C  52. 
Mashakabu,  chief  of,  D  66. 
Mashuasha,  great  chief  of,  A  38. 
Maspero,  G.,  Art  in  Egypt,  A  86. 
Retirement  of,  A  93. 
Place  of  bull  fights,  B  24. 
Marseilles  Museum,  B  181, 
183. 
„  Palermo  stone  royal  titles, 

B  182. 
„  Ra  rendered  Ria,  B  187. 

Popular  songs,  C  36. 
„  Notice  of  Georges   Perrot, 

C93- 
Obituary  of,  C  145. 
,.  Transcription  of  ra,  D  78. 

Transliteration,  D  78-83. 
„  Tree  divinities,  D  83. 

Underground  Nile  legends, 

D84. 
On  Maot-kheru,  D  84. 
Official  memoir  of,  D  127. 
Maspero,  J.  J.  G.,  death  of,  B  95. 

Greek    inscriptions    of 

Dendereh,  B  187. 
Coptic    relief  and    art, 

B  187. 
Horapollo   papyrus,   C 

164. 
Melitus  a  fictitious  per- 
son, C  165. 
Mast  set  up  in  villages,  D  94. 

„     of  ash  wood,  D  1 26. 
Mau-hes,  lion-god,  stele,  B  182. 
Maximus  and  Domitius,  SS.,  D  72. 
McClintock,  W.   F.   P.,    Egyptian  blue, 

A  186. 
Measures  of  capacity  represented,  B  39, 
D  126. 

N  2 


i6 


Index. 


Medamot  inscriptions,  C  i66. 
„        sacred  bull,  C  i66. 
Megaliths  in  Libya,  A  184. 
Mehy,  A  88. 
Meir,  Rock  tombs  of,  B    84,  C  43,  88, 

D  124. 
Melitus,  a  fictitious  person,  C  165. 
Melkin,  Book  of,  C  64,  66,  67. 
Memphis,  excavations  taken  by   Phila- 
delphia, B  191,  C  38,  187, 

D143. 
gods  of,  B  185. 
„  lead  tokens  of,  B  108. 

building  of  Merneptah,  C  38. 
Men  sacrified  at  funeral,  A  124. 
Mendes,  deities  of,  D  127. 
inscriptions,  A  38. 
Menkara  of  XXVth  dynasty,  D  40,  137. 
Menkheper-ra  kings,  XVIIIth-XXVth 

dynasties,  D  1 36. 
Menna,  tomb  of,  A  95. 
Mennell,  Mr.,  on  African  flints,  B  68. 
Mentu,  stele  of,  A  36. 

„       worship  of,  D  1 14. 
Mentuemhot  family,  A  41,  B  24,  181. 

„  tomb,  C  JJ. 

Mentuhetep  kings,  C  82. 
Mentuhetep  III,  C  80,  82. 
Mentuhetep  Nebhetep-ra,  C  90,  D  38. 
Mentuhetep  V,  causeway  of,  C  83,  D  1 27. 
Menu,  depth  back  from  eye,  B  27. 
Menzalah  flooded,  A.D.  554,  D  45. 
iJ^/^r  of  cattle,  birds  and  fishes,  D  84. 
Mera,  A  68. 

Mercer,  S.  A.  B.,  Gorringe  collection,  B 
182,  C  49. 
„  Emperor     worshi])    in 

Egypt,  D  170. 
Merhortefef,  D  126. 
Merimes,  viceroy  of  Kush,  C  164. 
Meritu  workmen,  D  69. 
Merneit,  A  154. 
Merneptah  hall  at  Abydos,  A  104. 

„  palace,  Memphis,  C  38,  187. 

Merncptah-nefuoa,  A  1 5. 
Meroe  excavations  and  periods,  A  175. 
Mertisen  .stele,  B  182. 
Mertitha  offering  to  Horaakhuti,  A  14. 
Meru,  high-priest,  D  1 30. 
Merykara,  IXth  dynasty,  C  90. 


Merytneit,  A  1 54. 
Mesnitu,  D  no. 
Mesvinian  flints,  B  61,  62. 
Metals  in  Egypt,  B  12. 
Metemp.sychosis,  A  30. 
Meteoric  iron  in  use,  D  45. 
Meyer,  — ,  Lawgiver  kings,  B  92. 
Miles,  F.  D.,  Egyptian  blue,  A  186. 
Milne,  J.  G.,  Roman  currency  of  Egypt 
A  177. 
„  Leaden  tokens  from  Mem- 

phis, B  107. 
„  Alexandrian     coinage     of 

Gallienus,  D  152. 
Min,  father-god,  A  22. 
„     gold  figure  of,  A  4. 
„     source  of,  D  11 8. 
„     worship  of,  D  II4. 
Min-Hor  (Bes),  B  85. 
Mina,  .stele  of,  D  131. 
Mirror,  bronze,  A  4,  D  40. 
„       Kerma,  C  87. 
„       silver,  Lahun,  A  99. 
Mithra-hears,  name,  A  136. 
Mochlos  stone  vases,  B  30. 
Models,  silversmith's,  A  1 12. 
Moesianus,  M.,  D  112. 
.Mbller,  Dr.,  A  46. 

„  Numeral  lines,  A  136. 

Mond,  Dr.  Robert,  A  46,  93,  95,  B  169, 

C36. 
Monks,  Egyptian,  in  Gaul  and  Ireland, 

C  65,  66. 
Montet,  P.,  Grapes  and  wine,  A  38. 
„  Clap-net,  C  164. 

„  and  J.  Couyat,  Hammamat, 

A  90. 
Months,  Macedonian  and  Egyptian,  C 

163. 
Moon  cult  in  Sinai,  A  9. 
Moral  qualities  in  metaphor,  A  56. 
Morals,  C  20. 
Mordrayns,  C  i. 

Moret,  A.,  Monumentsof  Avignon,  A  36. 
Nomes  of  Upper  Egypt,  C  1 5. 
Bequest  of  estates,  C  16. 
Sardab  and  ka  house,  C  177. 
on  Dau,  C  166. 
on  Beb,  C  166. 
on  Meritu,  D  69. 


Index. 


17 


Moret,  A.,  Mortuary      contract,      Xlth 
dynasty,  D  38. 
„  Declar^ion    of     a     domain, 

D  93.' 
„  Local  administration,  D  139. 

Morrison,  Dr.  Walter,  B  169. 
Mortillet,  Adrien  d^.Mtisee  Prehistorique, 

B60. 
Mosquito  nets,  A  167. 
Mother  and  Child  statuette,  B  154. 
Mothers  of  kings  in  Annals,  C  115. 
Mourners  on  Dipylon  pottery,  C  167. 
Mousterian  flints,  B  70-72. 
Mud  toys,  A  165. 

„  American,  B  143. 

Mukhiy,  D  121. 
Muller,    Max,    Palestine    place    names, 

B86. 
Multiple  souls  in  Negro  Africa,  B  103. 
Mummifying,  custom  of,  A  1 16. 

early,  A  179. 
Mummy  invoice  for  transport,  A  90. 
labels,  A  83. 
„         model  of,  A  131,  C    152. 
„        wheat,  A  78. 
Munier,  H.,  Coptic  O.T.  MSS.,  D  70. 
„  SS.  Maximus  and  Domitius, 

D  72. 
„  Martyrdom  of  Philotheos,  D 

131- 
„  Stela  of  Mina,  D  131. 

Murray,  Miss  M.  A.,  A  191. 

„  Stele    of    Apa    Te- 

leme,  A  1 56. 
„  Cult  of  the  drowned, 

B91. 
„  Egyptian     elements 

in  Grail  Romance, 

C  I,  54. 
„  Temple   of    Ramses 

II,  Abydos.  C  121. 
„  Pendant  amulets,  D 

49. 
,,  Fresh  inscriptions,  D 

62. 
„  Statue  of  Nefer-sma- 

aa,  D  146. 
„  Sculpture     of     Pto- 

lemy I,  D  167. 
Mu.seums,  education  value  of,  C  84,  89. 


Mussius  L.  Aemilianus,  D  122. 
Mut,  hymn  to,  A  108. 

„     worship  of,  D  109. 
Mutilated  signs  of  animals,  B  8g. 
Myres,  Prof.,  D  48. 


Naga  ed-Deir,  A  61. 
Naifaarud  shrine,  B  27. 
Name  bead,  D  56. 
Names  of  Egypt,  D  i  J9. 
Napata,  pyramids,  D  172. 

temple,  D  173? 
Narmer  head,  B  16S. 

„        slate  palette,  A  6,  B  99,  D  30. 
Nasciens,  C  i. 

Naukratis,  discovery  of,  B  169. 
Navilie.  E.,  Papyri  of  Kamara  and  Nesi- 
khonsu,  A  43. 
Xlth  dynasty,  A  81. 
„  Archaeology  of  the  O.T.,  A 

89. 
„  Excavations  at  Abydos,  A 

•       103,  C  75- 
,,  Prehistoric  vase  designs,  D 

95- 
„  Plant  of  Horbeyt,  D  130. 

Nay,  D  127. 

Nebhat,  worship  of,  D  112. 
Nebkaura  Khety,  A  1 36. 
Nebmehy,  sculptor,  D  129. 
Nebpu,  A  102. 
Nebsneit,  B  78. 
Necklace  of  gold,  A  4. 
Necropolis  ofificials,  Thebes,  D  177. 
Nefer-arkara,  cylinder,  C  38. 
Nefer-atmu  and  lotus,  D  9  {see  Nefertum). 
Nefer-hetem,  B  80. 
Nefer-maot,  A  131. 
Nefer-ni-onkhti,  A  68. 
Nefer-ra,  falcon  name,  C  89. 
Nefer-sma-aa,  D  146. 
Nefertari,  D  127. 
Nefertu,  A  ^6. 

Nefertum,  often  called  Mahes,  D  130. 
Negative  confession,  A  58,  C  20. 

expression,  A  134,  135,  C  79. 
Negro,  head  of,  C  144. 
Negroes  of  Africa,  A  189. 
Neher-pa-sa-ast,  D  146. 

N-3 


i8 


Index. 


Neit,  adoration  of,  A  63,  155. 
„     emblem  tatued,  A  183. 

figure,  C  50. 
„     north  of  the  fortress,  B  26. 
„     worship  of,  D  1 14. 
Neit-mest-onkh,  A  72. 
Nekheb-uau,  A  88. 
Nekh-het-user,  R  7. 
Nekht,  figure  of,  lost,  C  84.  85. 
„       tomb  copied,  C  86. 
„       overseer  of  prophets,  A  37. 
„       priest,  D  129. 
Nekht-her-heb,  B  28. 

sacred  dance,  C  JK). 
Nekht-nebef,  King,  B  28. 

weight  of,  B  184. 
Nekhtanebo  restores  worship,  C  43. 
Nepat,  grain-goddess,  B  28. 
Ner,  A  70. 
Nerher,  A  70. 

Nesikhonsu,  papyrus  of,  A  43. 
Neskhonsu,  B  25. 
Nes-min  son  of  Mertheru,  A  t^j. 
Nes-ptah,  A  41,  B  25,  28,  181. 
Nes-shu-tefnut,  C  165. 
Nes-thoth,  B  25. 
Nes-uazet,  A  "ji. 
Nes-unnefer,  D  127. 
Nesut,K  137,  D  85. 
Nesut  da  hetep,  B  140,  C"  35. 
Nesut-uba-00,  D  127. 
Nesut-zaza-kheri,  A  179. 
Net,  clap-,  C  164. 
„     drag-,  A  168. 
Neteg-Amen,  A  175. 
Neter-khet,  King,  B  41. 
Neterui  place  name,  A  35. 
Neuser-ra  in  .Sinai,  A  10. 
New  law  on  Antiquities,  A  128. 
Newberry,  Prof.  F.  E.,  Nome  ensigns,  A  5- 
„  Scarabs,  A  61. 

,•      „  Tree  of  Heracleo- 

polite        Nome, 
A  132. 
„  Ranebkhau  Khety, 

A  136. 
„  Nome    of    Tham, 

A  137- 
„  Ta  Tehenu,  B  97. 

Nibby,  letter  addressed  to,  D  167. 


Nicon,  D  123. 

Nies,  J.   B.,   Boomerang   in    Babylonia, 
A  189. 

Nigeria,  terra-cotta  heads  from,  A  85. 
Night-Jar,  carving  of,  B  3. 
Nikau-ptah,  false  door  of,  D  62. 
Nike  on  Oxyrhynchite  tokens,  B  1 10. 
Nile  underground,  legends  of,  D  84. 
Nilus,  hymn  to,  C  79. 

„      sources  in  Herodotos,  B  184. 

„      type  on  tokens,  B  108. 
Nimbus,  source  of,  B  58. 
Nomad  state  of  Eg>'ptians,  D  1 16. 
Nomarchs  from  Vth  to  Xllth  dynasty, 

C  88. 
Nome  deities  in  order  of  zodiac,  C  165, 
18S. 

„       ensigns, historical  significance,  A  5. 

„       list  at  Abydos,  C  125. 

„       of  Oxyrhynchus,  A  74. 

„       Xth  of  Upper  Egypt,  A  35,  C  20. 

„       of  Tham,  A  137. 
Nomes  of  Upper  Egypt,  C  15. 
North,   Mr.,   B  47,   95;    Lieut.,    B    191, 

C94. 
Nubarset,  D  129. 
Nubsmu.sekht,  A  107. 
Nubian  Christian  texts,  A  1 39. 
Number  lines  horizontal  at  first,  A  Tfy. 

„         ordinal  and  cardinal,  A  136. 
Numerals,  Hittite,  B  18. 
Nuna,  B  82. 

Nut,  earliest  goddess,  A  17. 
Nymphaea  lotus,  D  i. 


Oases,  customs  in,  B  87. 
Obelisks  from  Heliopolis,  D  131. 

„         in  front  of  temples,  D  118. 

„         priest  of,  D  62. 

„         removed  to  New  York,  C  49. 
Obelisk-box  of  Bastet,  €52. 
Observatory,  supposed,  at  Meroe,  A  176. 
Obsidian,  source  of,  C  89. 

„         vases,  Lahun,  A  99. 
Odes,  Christian,  D  134. 
Odyssey,  Hittites  named  in,  C  32. 
Ofiering  chamber,  A  123,  C  152. 
Offerings  in  Vth  dynasty,  A  88. 
„         in  Vlth  dynasty,  A  89. 


Index. 


19 


Offerings  in  Africa,  A  122. 

„         in   boxes    sealed    by    officials, 

A   XQf^ 

„        at  the  graves,  A  123. 
„         killed,  A  123. 
„         Mexican,  B  143. 
„         to  viceroy  of  Kush,  C  1 64. 
Officers'  Families  Fund,  B  47,  95,  D  144. 
Offord,   Joseph,    Alexandrian    archaeo- 
logy, B  57. 
„  Papyrus  in  Egypt,  B  86. 

„  French      and      Italian 

Egyptology,  C  15. 
„  Negro  head,  C  144. 

»  Egyptology  in  France, 

C  163,  D  69,  176. 
„  Praefecti  Aegypti, 

D  122. 
„  the  Libel  I  us,  D  149. 

Ohati,  Ohaiu,  B  85. 
Olive  land,  Libya,  B  97. 
Ombo,  Kom,  work  at,  C  39. 
Omom  (Bes),  B  85. 
Onkh,  origin  of,  C  164. 

related  with  Cross,  C  98,  106. 
Onkh-em-aakhuti,  Ethiopic  king,  A  40. 
Onkh-nekht,  A  76. 
Onkh-tekh,  C  90. 
Onkh-uas,  C  80. 
Ontario  archaeology,  C  143. 
Onz,  Osiris  of  Behbit,  A  64. 
Oracle  of  Aohmes  \,  D  128. 
„      by  objects  thrown,  A  164. 
questions  to,  D  90. 
Oracular  dream,  A  83. 
„        priest,  D  64. 
Orr,  R.  B.,  Ontario  archaeology,  C  143. 
Oryx  Nome,  A  6. 

„  in  XlXth  dynasty,  C  125. 

Osireion,  A  103,  143. 
Osiris,  corvee  of,  C  155. 
„      figure  of,  C  50. 
„      judged  by  Ra,  A  21. 
„      judgement  b)',  A  27. 
„      kingdom  of,  A  26,  28. 
„      from  Libyan  ausar,  D  1 17. 
„      mythology  of,  A  20,  42,  83. 
relics  in  Nomes,  A  8. 
shrine  at  Meroe,  A  176. 
„      worship  of,  D  it2. 


Osirification  of  king,  A  142. 
Osmiridium,  B  23. 
Ossuaries,  Cretan,  B  29. 
Ostracine,  D  125. 
Ostrich-feather  for  spirits,  A  118. 
Overbergh,  C.  van,  Negroes  of  Africa, 

A  189. 
Ovoid  flints,  B  71,  72. 
Oxen,  horned  and  hornless,  A  180. 
Ox-tail  worn  by  kings,  A  161. 
Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  C  40,  D  87. 
„  tokens,  B  no. 


Paari,  priest,  D  129.  • 

Pactumeius,  T.  Magnus,  D  122. 
Padabastet,  King,  B  35. 
Paganism  and  Christianity  (Scott-Mon- 

crieff),  A  92. 
Paherpedt,  D  129. 
Paionkh  son  of  Herhor,  A  178. 
Pa-khred-ast,  D  127. 
Pa-khred-bast,  prince  of  Tentyra,  D  132. 
Pa-khred-ka,  D  132. 
Palaeolithic  flints,  B  59-68. 
„  religion,  A  16. 

Palenque  cross,  source  of,  C  108. 
Palermo  stone  and  Den,  A  148. 

„  ceremonies    of    new 

reign,  B  27. 
„  interregnum,  B  28. 

„  new   portions  of  an- 

nals, C  1 14,  D  70. 
„  restorations  of,  C  1 82. 

royal  titles,  B  182. 
Palestine,  changes  of  level  in,  B  126. 
Palettes,  captives  on,  A  171. 

style  of,  D  30. 
Palmetto,  origin  of,  D  14. 
Palmyrene  steles  from  Koptos,  A  139. 
Pamedu,  C  153. 
Pasa  son  of  Psibast,  D  1 28. 
Panefudabastet,  B  28. 
Pankhy,  B  28. 

Panther  head  sign  peh,  D  y6. 
Papyri,  Biblical,  D  133. 

,,        industrial  details  of,  A  141. 
„       Oxyrhynchus,  C  40,  D  87. 
Papyrus,  Harris,  magic,  D  69. 
„         on  throne,  D  6. 

N  4 


20 


Index. 


Papyrus,  volume  of  truncated  pyramid, 

D  lOO. 
Paqerhet,  place,  B  28. 
Paraetonium,  B  158. 
Paramessu,  C  35. 
Parthenios,  monuments  of,  B  90. 
Pasar,  priest,  D  129. 
Pasebkhanu  I,  C  189. 
Pasenmut,  B  25. 

Pashedbastet,  son  of  Sheshenq  II,  C  35. 
Passage  for  the  spirit,  A  1 18. 
Paton,    D.,    Early    Records    of    Travel, 

Vol.  I,  C81  ;  Vol.  II,  D  173. 
Patterns  in  Libya,  A  183. 
Pectorals,  inlaid,  of  Amenemhot  III,  A 

97- 
„  of  Senusert  II,  A  3.  97. 

Peda-amen,  B  81. 
Peda-ast,  A  37. 
Peda-atmu,  B  28. 
Pedabast,  King,  A  3?. 
Pedabast,  D  127. 
Pedakhut,  D  126. 
Pedapcp,  B  28. 
Pedasebek,  B  26. 
Peet,  Eric,  A  46,  C  47,  94. 

„  Stele  of  Sebek-khu,  C  45. 

„  The  negative,  C  jg. 

„  Relations  of  Egypt  and  Asia, 

C  89. 

„  Mortuary  contract,  D  38. 

,,  Sinai  inscriptions,  D  134. 

Pefbastet,  D  126. 
Pell  sign,  D  76. 
Peka,  A  66,  70. 
Pekashed,  B  80. 
Pekhetneit,  B  78. 
Penkhebtuzu,  D  126. 
Pennut,  prince  of  Tentyra,  D  132. 
Pen-ptah,  D  120. 
Pepy  I,  copper  figure  of,  B  48. 

„  .-   cylinder,  B  26. 
Pepy  II,  statue,  endowment,  D  93. 
Pepy-onkh-her-ab,  D  124. 
Perabsen,  Set  name  of,  A  5. 
Perduat  and  zebt,  B  24. 
Perrot,  Georges,  notice  of,  C  93. 
Persecution,  Decian,  D  149. 
Persen,  A  72. 
Persian  invasions  of  Egypt,  C  dj. 


Pessimism,  A  25,  42,  57. 
Petes,  A  n. 
Petesouchos,  B  188. 
Pet-hor-nesut-ta  son  of  Pana,  D  1 28. 
Petrie,  W.  M.  F.,  Beliefs  in  a  Future  Life, 
A  i6. 

„  Mysterious  Zet,  A  32. 

„  Glass  blowing,  A  33. 

„  Prehistoric      boats     or 

towns,  A  11- 

„  Earliest  inscriptions,  A 

61. 

„  Mummy  wheat,  A  78. 

„  Amulets,  A  91. 

„  Treasure  of  Lahun,  A 

97- 
Egypt  in  Africa,  A  115 

159. 

„  New  Law  on   Antiqui- 

ties, A  128. 

„  The   Metals  in   Egypt; 

B  12. 

„  Stone  Age,  B  59,  122. 

„  Boat  names,  B  136. 

„  Egyptian  Museum 

University  College,  B 
168. 

„  End  of  the  Hittites,  C 

32. 
„  Queenly  titleof  XX I  Ind 

dynast)',  C  70. 
„  Early  forms  of  Cross,  C 

97- 
„  New  portions  of  Annals, 

C  1 14. 

„  Funeral  figures,  C  151. 

„  Cemetery  portal,  C  174. 

„  Egypt   and    Mesopota- 

mia, D  26. 

„  Geography  of  the  Gods, 

D  109. 

„  Inscriptions     of    Sinai, 

D  134. 

„  Scarabs  and   c)-linders, 

D  135- 
Petronius  Honoratus,  prefect,  C  18. 
Pezard,  M.,  Excavations  at  Bushire,  D  96. 
Philadelphia    Museum    excavations,    B 

191,  C  38,  187,  D  143. 
Philae,  damage  at,  D  128. 


Index. 


21 


Philagrius,  D  123. 

Philosophic  distinctions  unnoticed,  A  56. 
Philotheos,  martyrdom  of,  D  131., 
Phoenician  alphabet  vowelless,  C  78. 

„  type  of  figure,  D  60. 

Phoibamn,  on  tablet,  A  54. 
Phythian- Adams,  W.  J.,  A  175. 
Pick  of  flint,  B  64. 

„  used  for  root  grubbing,  B  64. 

Pieper,  M.,  Altarof  Amenemhot  I,  A  136. 

XI 1 1  th  dynasty,  B  90. 
Pierret,  Paul,  obituary,  C  187. 
Pine,  Cilician,  D  126. 
Placenta  honored,  A  161. 
Plan  of  building,  ancient,  D  21,  142. 

„       temple,  Abydos,  C  136,  137. 
Plaster  casting,  C  TJ. 
Plaumann,  G.,  Greek  originals  of  demotic 

writings,  A  82. 
Ploughing,  A  26. 
Plundering  of  tombs,  A  3,  C  36,  39,  D 

127,  130. 
Pnepheros,  god,  B  57. 
Pogue,  J.  E.,  Turquoise,  C  142. 
Pole  across  grave,  A  1 19. 
Polychrome  borders,  C  169. 
Pomegranate  tree  figured,  A  1 32. 
Pomponius  Januarius,  D  123. 
Portal  of  cemetery,  C  174. 
Portrait  head,  Xllth  dynasty,  D  92. 
Portrait  painting,  D  89. 
Potter's  mark,  foreign,  D  97. 
Pottery,  biscuit-ware,  of  Sudan,  A  45. 

„        black  and   red,  A    138,    165,  C 
87. 

„        black  incised,  C  88. 

„        confusion  about,  B  183. 

„        Nubian,  C  87. 

„        red  and  white  Algerian,  A  165. 
Praefecti  Aegypti,  C  18,  D  122. 
Predynastic  ships,  A  33,  D  26-28,  35,  72, 

95- 

„  ivory  carving,  D  26. 

„  kings,  C  1 14,  1 18. 

Prefects,  C  18,  D  122. 
Preservation  of  antiquities,  A  140,  D  174. 
Prices  from  papyri,  A  141. 
Priest  of  family,  eldest  son,  A  124. 
Proculus,  Sen,  C  18. 
Prophets  at  Thebes,  list  of,  A  36. 


Psais,  quarry  master,  B  90. 
Ptah,  Creator-god,  A  22. 

„      patron  of  artists,  C  72. 
Ptah-may,  D  127. 
Ptah-mery,  D  127. 
Ptah-mes,  A  36.    ' 

„  son  of  Any,  B  182. 

Ptah-seker,  worshipped  by  Sebekemsaf, 

A  14. 
Ptah-shepses  mastaba,  B  7. 
Ptolemaic  calendar,  C  163. 

„  coinage,  forgery  of,  B  107. 

„  portraits,  D  "Jt,. 

Ptolem\'  I,  Akhmim  shrine,  B  24. 

„  gem  of,  C  96. 

„  inscription,  B  1 18. 

„  sculpture,  D  167. 

Ptolemy  II,  Akhmim  shrine,  B  24. 

„  inscription,  C  163. 

Ptolemy  III,  held  Pamphylia.  C  163. 

„  Euergetes,  B  57. 

Ptolemy  IV,  portrait,  D  73. 

„  coin  and  seal,  C  96. 

Ptolemy  VI,  portrait,  D  73. 
Ptolemy  IX,  B  182. 

„  dedication,  B  188. 

Ptolemy  X,  B  57. 

„  statuette,  €51,  95. 

Ptolemy  XI H,  B  58,  90. 
Ptolemies,  dates  and  ages  of,  C  95. 
Puamra,  tomb  of,  C  85,  D  172. 
Pylon  of  Heremheb,  C  34. 
Pyramid  of  Lahun,  A  50. 
Pyramid,  duplicate,  of  one  king,  A  161. 
Pyramid  Texts  classified,  A  42. 

in  XlXth  dynasty,  D  127. 
purport,  A  57. 
„  royal  formularies,  A  22. 

Pyramid  truncated,  volume,  D  100. 
Pyramids  of  Napata,  D  172. 

Qantara  necropolis,  D  84. 
Qedesh,  battle  of,  C  135. 

„        scarab,  B  174. 
Qenbei,  D  139. 
Quarrying,  season  of,  A  91. 
Queen  of  Eg>pt,  position  of,  B  42. 
Quibell,  Mr.,  A  45,  93.  191.  C  94-  D  48. 
„  Excavations  at  Saqqara,B  6. 

Tomb  of  Hesy,  B  37. 


22 


Index. 


Quibell,  Mrs.,  C  94. 
Quietus,  coinage  of,  D  157. 

Ra,  appearing  from  lotus,  D  9. 
„   early  date  of  worship,  A  17. 
„    figure  of,  €52. 
„   judges  Osiris,  A  21. 
„    rendered  Ria,  B  187. 
„    worship  from  East,  A  21,  D  109. 
Race,  invaders  of  Egypt,  D  zj,  32,  35, 
36. 
„      invaders  from  Elam,  D  32. 
„      predynastic  Egyptian,  D  27. 
Racial  types  at  Abu  Simbel,  D  57. 
Rahetep,  Prince,  C  48. 
Ram-headed  god,  A  162. 
Ram.  worship  of,  D  116. 
Ra-maot  cartouche,  a  Sebekhetep,  B  27. 
Ramessu  I,  origin  of,  C  36. 
Ramessu  II,  monuments,  A  36,  n,  C  51. 
„  sacred  dance,  C  76. 

„  temple  at  Abydos,  C    121, 

176-180. 
Ramessu  III,  girdle  of,  A  174. 
„  palace  of,  D  92. 

Ramessu   IV,  foundation  deposit  of,  D 

171. 
Rameses,  royal  son  of,  A  36. 
Ramnius,  Q.  Martialis,  D  122. 
Rams'  heads  in  graves,  A  1 38. 
Ranefer,  statue  of,  A  192. 
Rathgen,  F.,  Decay  and  preservation  of 

antiquities,  A  140. 
Read,  F.  W.,  on  Isis  Papyrus,  C  42. 
„  King  Zet,  C  150. 

„  on  Annals,  D  70. 

„  Statuette    of    Khonsu,    D 

120. 
„  on  Word  for  dragoman,  D 

177. 
Reaping,  A  26. 
Recess  graves,  A  1 1 9. 
Red  cattle  sacrificed,  A  164. 
Reeds  in  corners  of  grave,  A  1 18. 
Regnal  year,  Coptic  form,  B  138. 
Rehoboth,  Christian  in.scriptions,  B  185. 
Reigns    reckoned    by   accession   or   by 

death,  C  1 18. 
Reil,    Theodor,     Industrial     details    of 
papyri,  A  141. 


Reinach,  A.,  Antiquities   from  Koptos, 
A  139. 
>•  Egyptology    and    history 

of  religion,  A  1 39. 
„  missing  since  19 14,  C  187. 

Reisner,  Dr..  A  45,  61,  93. 

Work  at  Gizeh,  A  88,  C  40, 
48. 
„  Work    at  Third    Cataract,^ 

A  138. 
„  Excavations  at  Kerma.  C 

74,  86. 
in  Nubia,  D  48,  172. 
Religion,  history  of,  A  139. 
„         individual,  A  29,  30. 
„         main  periods  of,  A  16. 
„         and  modern  parallels,  C  90. 
Religious  Thought  in   Egypt,  Breasted 

on,  A  42. 
Rennut,  name,  D  127. 
Research   Students'  Association,  A  47^ 

94,  B  47,  96. 
Reservoirs  of  XlXth  dynasty,  D  45. 
Restoration  of  the  corpse,  A  1 18. 
Resuscitation  of  Osiris,  A  20. 
Reuter,  Dr.   L.,   Embalming    materials, 

A  180. 
Rhodes,  demotic  statue,  A  82. 
Ricci,  Seymour  de,  Latin  will,  C  17. 

„  Inscription   of   trial, 

D69. 
,,  Interpreterin  France, 

D  143. 
Richter,  G.  M.,  on  Dipylon  vases,  C  167. 
Ring-snares,  A  168 
Rings  of  Ptolemy  VI,  D  73. 
Riqqeh,  jewellery  from,  A  3. 
Ritual  of  ceremonies,  D  I3r. 

„      of  the  Judgement,  B  46. 
Roads  of  the  future  life,  A  162. 
Robbers,  search  for,  D  87. 
Robbing  of  tombs,  A  3. 
Roeder,  G.,  Artists'  names.  A  132. 
„  Name  of  Set,  A  133. 

„  Ramessu  II  "son  of  Ra   in 

truth,"  B  138. 
Roman  burials,  B  6. 

inscriptions,  C  39. 
„       trade  to  China,  D  138. 
Rose  lotus,  D  2. 


Index. 


23 


Rosenberg,  G.  A.,  Conservation  of  an- 
tiquities, D  174. 

Rosetta  Stone,  Gell's  readings,  D  163. 

Roth,  H.  Ling.  Egyptian  and  Greek 
looms,  A  140. 

Rowdon,  Miss,  C  47. 

Royal  ceremony  to  benefit  country,   A 

57- 
„      succession  in  Ethiopia;  A  IJ. 
Ruffer,  Dr.   M.  A.,  Palaeopathology,  A 

138. 
Rusch,  Richard,  Hittite  numerals,  B  181. 
Ry.  A  67,  73. 

Sa,  god,  B  80. 

Sabitha,  Syrian  measure,  B  40. 

Sacrifices,  human,  at  funeral,  A  124,  C  74 

86. 
Safi,  Tell  es-,  shrine,  D  104. 
Sahura,  conquests  of,  B  99,  C  89. 

cylinder,  B  82. 
„        priest  of,  D  62. 
Sais,  variant  writing  of  name,  D  147. 
Sale  of  propertj',  A  1 39. 
Sallustius,  Hadrianus,  D  123. 
Sanehat,  Notes  on,  B  24,  183,  C  81. 
Saqqara,  Excavations,  B  6. 
Sarabit,  worship  of  Sopt,  D  103. 
Sardes,  Pana  of,  D  128. 
Sarras,  king  of,  C  i. 
Snnt,  local  chiefs,  D  139. 
Sat-Hathor-ant,  canopies  of,  A  99. 
Saton,  Syrian  measure,  B  40. 
Satuna  represented,  B  91. 
Satyr  figure,  C  50. 
Saw-fish  ensign,  A  161. 
Saw  flints,  B  74,  yy. 
Sayce,  Prof.  A.  H.,  A  175. 

„  Biscuit-ware    of  the 

Sudan,  A  145. 

„  Stele  of  .^men-renas, 

D37- 
Scarabs,  A.  Grenfell  on,  B  185,  C  22. 
„         contemporary  with  kings,  D  1 36. 
„         and  cylinders  with  names,  D 135. 
„         different  genera  of,  D  1 36. 
Scenes  in  tombs,  of  magic  value,  B  140. 
Schafer,  H.,  Egyptian  art,  C  91. 

„  Art  of  Akhenaten,  C  76. 

„  Vowelless  Phoenician,  C  78. 


Schafer,  H.,  King  Huni,  C  78. 

Aahmes  son  of  Abana,  C  78. 
Scheil,  v.,  Base  of  lave r,  B  182. 

„  Three  kings  of  East,  B  183. 

Schiaparelli,  Prof,  A  93. 
Schmidt,  R  R.,  Diluviale  Vorzeit,  B  60. 
Schott,  W.  H.,  Roman  trade  from  China, 

D  137. 
Scorpion-king,  D  30. 
Scottish  Women's  Hospitals,  D  144,  179. 
Scott- M on crieff,    P.    D.,    Paganism    and 

Christianity,  A  92. 
Scraper  flints,  B  76. 
Sculptor's  life  study,  D  93. 
Sea  level  changes,  B  126-134. 
Season  of  quarrying,  A  91. 
Seats  for  priests,  B  142. 
Seba,  B  80. 
Sebek,  late  name  of,  A  132,  B  188. 

„      worship  of,  D  11 6. 
Sebekemsaf  Queen,  C  167. 
„  stele  of,  A  14. 

Sebekhetep  I,  name,  B  90. 
Sebek-khu  stele,  C  45,  90. 
Sebeky,  high  priest,  D  131. 
Sebeky  By,  high  priest,  D  131. 
Sed  festival,  A  160,  C  76. 
Seebohm,  H.,  on  Telephos  and  Hittites, 

C94- 
Segeb  (Bes),  B  85. 
Seker,  A  37. 
Sekhmet,  figure,  C  50. 

„         origin  of,  D  11 8. 
„         worship  of,  D  11 4. 
Seligman,  Prof  C.  G.,  Figures  of  captives, 
A  171. 
„  Multiple    souls    in 

Africa,  B  103. 
„  Notes  on  Bisharin. 

C45. 
„  Early      figure      of 

Taurt,  C  53. 
„  Prehistoric  site  in 

Kordofan,  D  39. 
Semitic  relations  of  Egyptians,  A    133, 

B  91. 
.Senatorial  conduct  in  Egypt,  D  87,  88. 
Senbi,  B  84. 
Senhetep,  C  154. 
Senka-amcn-seken  statue,  D  173. 


24 


Index. 


Sen-mut,  A  76. 
Sen-nezem  tomb,  A  142. 
Senshe,  place,  A  75. 
Senusert  I,  obelisk,  A  46. 
„  relief  of,  B  192. 

„         scarab,  C  28. 
„  statues,  A  144. 

„  statuettes,  B  149,  192. 

Senusert  II,  head,  A  144. 
jewellery,  A  3. 
„  pyramid,  A  49. 

„  town  of,  A  101. 

Senusert  III,  C  46. 
Serapis  on  Indian  coins,  D  138. 
Serdab  and  ka  house,  C  TJ. 
Serpents  entwined,  D  33. 
Serval  or  lynx,  D  30. 
Set  animal,  D  72. 
„    name  of  Perabsen,  A  5. 
„  .,        Khosekhemui,  A  5. 

„    names  of,  A  133. 
„    a  primitive  god,  A  19. 
„    and  Sutekh,  D  1 19. 
„    worship  of,  D  1 10. 
Sethe,  K.,  King  Asa,  Vth  dynasty,  A  80. 
„  Daughter  marriage,  A  131. 

„  Name  of  Suchos,  A  132. 

Hand,  A  133. 
„  Here  and  there,  A  134. 

Negative,  A  135. 
„  Demotic  forms,  B  138. 

„  Slate  palettes,  C  75. 

„  An  auxiliary  form,  C  79. 

„  Antef  son  of  Mayt,  C  80. 

„  Onkh  uas,  C  80. 

Setnekht,  ostrakon  of  A  107. 
Sety  I,  temple  clearance,  C  39. 
Sety  II,  iron  sword  of,  A  131,  B  22. 
Seyffarth,  letter  cover  of,  D  166. 
Seza,  B  82. 
Sha,  B  82. 

Shabaka,  sacred  dance,  C  79. 
Shabtis,  C  \$i,  see  Ushabti. 
Shadow  of  a  man,  B  104. 
Shahdidyt,  goddess,  D  124. 
Shasu  type  at  Abu  Simbel,  D  57,  58,  61. 
Sheath  worn  by  Libyans,  A  183. 
Shed  form  of  Horus,  D  129. 
Shed-shed  for  spirit,  A  118. 
Shedt,  B  80. 


Shell  of  gold,  A  3. 

Shemaa,  list  of  Nomes,  C  15,  D  93. 

Shepnemut,  B  25. 

Shepses,  B  80. 

Shepsesardas,  B  27. 

Sheshenq  I,  parents  of,  D  129. 

Sheshenq  III,  contemporaries  of,  A  38. 

,,  donatives  of,  A  36. 

„  son  of,  D  127. 

stone  box  of,  B  27. 
Shield,  Amorite  and  Hittite,  C  135. 

„      worship  in  Delta,  A  7. 
Shining  East,  The,  B  190. 
Ships,    predynastic,  A  33,  D   26-8,  35, 

72,  95- 
Shrine  of  Anubis  symbol,  B  150. 
Shu,  god  of  space,  A  17. 
Shu  and  Tefnut,  A  162. 

„  worship  of,  D  1 1 3,  1 1 7 

Sickles  of  iron,  B  21. 
Sieve  trundled  at  birth,  B  88. 
Signary  in  Libya,  A  1 82. 
Signatures  of  artists,  A  132. 
Signs,  forms  and  variants,  A  37. 
„       of  fractions,  A  52. 
„       mutilated,  of  animals,  B  89. 
„       origins  of,  C  43. 
Silsileh,  Antef  king,  C  82. 
Silver,  history  of,  in  Egj'pt,  B  16. 
Silversmith's  models,  A  1 1 2. 
Sin  denied  not  confessed,  A  28. 
Sin,  Moon-god  in  Babylonia,  A  13. 
Sinai  and  Exodus,  D  95. 

geography  and  geologj',  D  90. 

god  Sopt  in,  D  103. 

inscriptions  of,  D  134. 

moon  cult  in,  A  9. 

source  of  copper,  B  1 2. 

tribes  of,  D  103. 
Sinking  of  Delta,  B  184,  188,  D  45. 
Sinuhe,  Notes  on,  B  24,  183,  C  18 1. 
Sister-marriage  of  king,  A  160. 
Sistrum  players  of  Hathor,  D  91. 
Situla,  bronze,  D  40. 
Skirt,  flounced,  from  Babylonia,  C  168. 
Skulls  of  animals,  changes  in,  B  55 
„  hung  up,  A  164. 

Skulls  of  Xllth  dynasty,  B  53. 
Slate  palettes,  see  Palettes. 
Sloping  passage  tomb,  A  1 20. 


Index. 


25 


Smith,  Prof.  Elliot,  A  179. 

n  Parallels  with  Egypt, 

•    C91. 
„  Influence  of  Egypt, 

C  141. 
Smith,  Sydney,  C  47. 
Smolensk!,      T.,     Westerners     under 

Rameses  II,  C  38. 
Snake  god  and  caduceus,  D  72. 

„      goddess,  B  50. 
Snares,  ring-shaped,  A  168. 
Sneferu  in  Sinai,  A  11. 
Sneferu  scarabs,  contemporary,  D  137. 
Sneferu-khaf,  parentage,  A  131. 
Snow-man  figures,  A  174. 
Solutrean  flints,  B  -Ji,  77. 

„  from  Elam,  D  32. 

Son,  eldest,  the  family  priest,  A  124. 
Son-in-law  succession,  C  62. 
Sonbattos  horseman,  B  57. 
Songs  of  peasantry,  modern,  C  36. 
Sopt,  the  god,  D  103. 
Sottas,  H.,  Property  sales,  A  1 39. 
„  Kheri-aaza-nesut,  A  179. 

„  Kau  plural,  A  180. 

Stele  of  Mertisen,  B  182. 
„  Demotic  papj'ri,  C  19. 

„  Wounded,  C  187. 

Sun-dial,  D  83. 
Soul-houses,  A  28,  127,  B  105. 
Soul  passage  from  grave,  A  118. 
Souls,  multiple,  in  Negro  Africa,  B  103. 
Spalato  monuments,  A  179. 
Spanton,  Dr.  W.  D.,  Water  lilies,  D  i. 
Spear  head  of  iron,  earliest,  B  2 1 . 

„  broad,  with  short  handle,  D 

172. 
Spells,  singing  of,  D  85. 
Sphinx,  origin  of  name,  C  181. 

„        at  Spalato,  A  179. 
Spiegelberg,  W.,  Liturgic  papyrus,  A  36. 
„  Donations  of  Sheshenq 

III,  A  36. 
„  Demotic  ostraka,  A  17, 

82,  83, 1 30,  B  92,  182. 
„  Contracts    under    Har- 

machis,  A  40. 
„  Demotic    Rhodian    in- 

scription, A  82. 
„  Dendereh  stele,  A  83. 


Spiegelberg,  W.,  Mummy  labels,  A  S3. 
.,  Hieratic  ostraka,  A  106. 

„  Inscription    of    Amen- 

hetep   son    of    Hapi, 

A  130. 
„  on  Khesebai,  A  130. 

„  on    General    Antef,    A 

135- 
„  on  nesut,  A  137. 

„  Xerxes  read  in  error,  A 

137- 
Ptolemy        XIII        at 
Sheykh  Haridi,  B  90. 
„  Monuments  of  Parthe- 

nios,  B  90. 
„  Mummy  label,  B  90. 

„  Arm  sign  value,  B  91. 

„  Coptic  for  regnal  year, 

B138. 
Royal  oath,  B  182. 
„  Leontopolis   lion    stele, 

B  182. 
„  Coptic    mi.scellanea,    B 

183. 
Spinning  double  thread,  A  167. 
Spirals,  C  23. 
Spirit,  ancestral,  A  162. 

„      in  air  over  dead,  D  77. 
„      of  inanimate  objects,  A  162. 
,,      multiple,  in  Africa,  B  103. 
„      passage  from  grave,  A  118. 
„      vehicle  for,  A  118. 
„      world  like  present,  A  162. 
Spoon  with  girl  figure,  B  7. 
Spurrell,  Flaxman,  notice  of,  B  93. 
Squared  walls  for  drawing,  C  43. 
Stairs  to  heaven,  origin,  D  1 19. 

„      amulet,  A  19. 
Stamp  of  wood,  Amen  neb  on,  B  27. 
Stannus,  Hugh,  Photographs  and  plans, 

C  121,  174. 
Stars,  circumpolar,  never  set,  A  1 8. 
Start,  L,  Coptic  cloths,  B  142. 
Statues,  housing  and  transport,  D  71. 
„        list  of  temple,  A  36. 
„         polished  by  touching,  D  128. 
in  tomb,  A  125. 
Statuette  of  boy,  B  7. 
Steatopygous  figures  of  Thessaly,  B  32. 
Steindorfi",  Prof.,  A  46,  93,  143. 


26 


Index. 


Steindorff,  Prof,  Grab  des  Ti,  A  89. 
Stele  type  on  cylinders,  A  63,  H  78. 
Stone  Age  in  Kgypt,  B  59,  122. 
Strack,  Prof.,  death  of,  C  47. 
Strata  collapsed,  B  1 28. 
Straw  hats  on  priests,  A  1 26. 
Strepyan  flints,  B  61,  62. 
Sudan  biscuit-ware,  A  145. 

„      Notes  and  Records,  D  143. 
Sudhaus,  Prof.,  C  47. 
Sulikuesos,  god  of  racing,  D  90. 
Sun,  see  Ra. 
Sundial,  B  184,  D  83. 
Surer,  tomb  of,  C  85. 
Surveys  of  temple  lands,  A  74. 
Suspension  of  this  Journal,  D  145. 
Sutekh  .scarabs,  B  174. 
Sword  in  Egypt,  A  131,  B  221. 

„      with  handle  of  inlaid  wood,  D  1 72- 
Syrian,  D  41. 
Sycomore  fig  tree,  sacred,  A  163. 
Synthetic  studies  (W.  S.  Caldecott),  A  92. 
Syrian  north,  cemetery,  D  29. 

„  racial  types,  D  57. 


Tabathat,  coffin  of,  i8i. 
Table,  sacramental,  C  55. 
Tahenu,  B  97. 
Takhredast,  B  26. 
Tamehu,  B  99. 
Tanent,  goddess,  C  166. 
Tanith  emblem.  C  107. 
Tanks  in  temples,  D  108. 
Tanutamen  statue,  D  173. 
Tapestries,  Hellenistic,  D  140. 
Tarkhaii,  races  at,  D  35. 
Tatuing,  A  183. 
Taurt,  compound  figure,  D  yy. 

„      early  figure,  €53. 
Tausert  stele  of  Bilgai,  A  1 30. 
Taxes  in  Vlth  dynasty,  D  94. 

„  '■  list  of  Roman,  D  89. 
Tax-gatherer  resigned,  D  87. 
Teeth,  bad,  A  138,  B  6. 
Tefnut,  goddess  of  fluid,  A  17. 
Tehuti,  lunar  deity,  A  9. 

„       name  dual,  B  82. 

„       originally  Moon-god,  D  1 16. 

„       recorder  of  Osiris,  A  27. 


Tehuti  in  Sinai,  A  9. 

„       worship  of,  D  1 12. 
Tehuti-ardas,  B  27. 
Tehuti-em-hot,  tomb  of,  C  86. 
Tehuti-her,  D  126. 
Tehuti-hetep  stele,  D  64. 
Tehuti-nefer-huya,  scenes  of.  C  170,  171. 
Tehutmes  III,  Akhmim  shrine,  B  24. 

„  foundation  deposit, D  173. 

„  sacred  dance,  C  76 

scarabs,  C  23. 
„  Sphinxat  Spaiato.A  179. 

Tehutmes  IV,  foundation  dcfxjsit,  D  173. 

„  ivory  of,  D  140. 

Tehutmes,  priest,  D  129. 

„  sarcophagus  at  Tuneh,  D  127. 

sculptor,  C  76. 
Tekilat,  Prince,  A  36. 
Teknu,  A  1 24. 
Teleme,  stele  of,  A  1 56. 
Temka,  A  73. 
Temple  on  scarab,  C  29. 
„        service,  D  71. 
„        treasures.  B  184,  D  89. 
Termier,  P.,  Atlantis,  D  174. 
Terra-cotta  heads,  Nigerian,  A  85.  169. 
Teta,  King,  A  88. 
Tetames,  C  153. 
Teta-nefer,  C  153. 
Teta-shera  statuette,  C  164. 
Tetten  (Bes),  B  85. 
Thanefer,  priest,  D  129. 
Tha\',  priest,  D  129. 
Theadelphia  excavations,  B  57,  i88. 
Thebes,  clearance  at,  D  171. 
Thebes-uaset  =  Karnak,  D  129. 
Thenta,  C  16. 

Thomas,  E.  S.,  An  Object  of  Hesy,  D  1 26. 
Thomp.son,  Sir  H.,   Table   of  fractions, 
A  54. 
„  Part  of  Coptic  Ser- 

mon, B  9. 
Thomp-son,  Horace,  A   191,  B  95,    191, 

C94. 
Thoth  month   begins  year  in  XVIIIth 

dynasty,  D  45. 
Thoth,  see  Tehuti. 
Three  kings  of  the  East,  B  183. 
Throne,  title  to,  in  Egypt,  B  42. 
Ti,  tomb  of  (G.  Steindorfit),  A  89. 


Index. 


27 


Timbuktu,  prehistoric  flint  in,  D  139. 
Tin  alloys  in  Egypt,  B  17. 

„    sources,  B  17,  18. 
Tinay  or  Yatnan,  Cyprus,  A  178. 
Titianus  Claudianus,  D  122. 
Toggle  pin,  A  173,  174,  D  40. 
Tokens  of  Roman  age,  B  107. 
Tomb  chapel,  A  126. 

furniture,  early,  D  124,  131. 
„       with  sloping  passage,  A  120. 
Tombs  in  Delta.  D  91. 
Tools  represented   B  38. 
Totemism,  A  163. 
Touching  statues,  B  128. 
Touraeff,  B.,  Stele  of  Xth  Nome,  B  26. 
„  Volume  of  truncated  pyra- 

mid, D  100. 
Trade  routes  to  China,  D  1 37. 
Transformation,  A  188. 
Transliteration,  D  78-83. 
Transmigration,  origin  of,  C  79. 
Travel,  Early  Records  of,  C  81,  D  173. 
Treasure  hunters'  manual,  D  176. 
Tree-goddess  worship,  A  17,  D  64,  83. 
Trees  round  pyramid,  A  51. 
Tree,  sacred,  A  163. 
Trial  pieces  from  Egypt,  D  171. 
Tridacna  shells,  B  34. 
Triphis  in  shrine,  B  90. 
Troy,  strata  of,  B  32. 
Trumper,  Lieut.,  Exodus  route,  B  86. 
Trundling  a  sieve  at  birth,  B  88. 
Truth,"  "son  of  Ra  in,  B  138. 
Tsuboi,  Prof.,  and  Egyptology  in  Japan, 

A  59. 
Tullus  Ptolemaios.  B  187. 
Tunah,  sarcophagus  at,  D  127. 
Tuphium,  sacred  bull,  C  166. 
Turquoi.se,  history  of,  C  I42. 
Tut,  lion-god  of  Heliopolis,  D  127. 
Tutonkhamen,  A  142,  C"  185. 
Twins,  human  and  animal,  A  162. 
Twisted  weaving,  C  1 39. 
Tyi,  queen,  coffin  of,  C  185. 
„  head  of,  C  76. 

Uakaremen,  B  28. 

Uasarken  I,  A  38. 

Uaua-ur,  .son  of  Pen-ptah,  D  1 20. 

Uazet,  litany  of,  D  124. 


Uazet,  Nome,  A  35. 

Udymu  and  the  Palermo  Stone,  A  148. 

Ukh,  fetish  of  Hathor.  B  84. 

Ukh-hetep,  B  84,  C  43,  88. 

Ulpius  Potami,  D  64. 

Unenka,  B  82. 

Union  of  Egypt,  lotus  and  papyrus,  D  7,8. 

University   College    Egyptian  Museum, 

B  168. 
Uou,  soldier,  C  79. 
Upuatmes,  D  124. 
Uraei  of  Isis  and  Serapis,  B  188. 
Urulius  Genus  (?),  D  123. 
User,  vizier,  A  37. 
Userhat,  tomb  of,  C  86. 
Ushabti  of  Xllth  dynasty,  B  153,  C  152. 

of  XVIIth  dynasty,  C  153. 

of  XVIIIth  dynasty,  C  155. 

of  XXVth  dynasty,  C  1 56. 

of  XXVIth  dynasty,  C  156. 

of  XXXth  dynasty,  C  156. 

functions  described  by  Lucian, 
C  154. 

growth  of  inscripti(jn,  C  1 54-161. 

materials,  C  158. 

name,  earliest,  C  1 54. 

numbers  of,  C  162. 
Uzarans,  B  25. 

Valerian,  Alexandrian  coinage,  D  152. 
Valerius  Firmus,  D  122. 
Valerius,  ¥.  Pompeianus,  D  123. 
Valerius  Quadratus,  diploma,  C  21. 
Valley  of  Kings'  Tombs,  B  129. 
Vatu,  wind-god,  scarab,  B  174. 
Vehicle  for  the  spirit,  A  1 18. 
Village,  independant,  with  mast,  D  94. 
Virile  or  total  reign  reckoned,  C  n8. 
Viscosity  of  water  known,  D  43. 
Vishnu  and  lotus,  D  10. 
Vizier  User,  A  2i7- 
Voice  of  Africa,  A  84. 
Volume  of  truncated  pyramid,  D  100. 
Votive  statuette,  Roman,  B  156. 
Vulture,  golden  headed,  B  i. 

Wainwright,  G.  A.,  A  46,  103,  U  48. 

„  Den    and     Palermo 

Stone,  A  148. 
„  Keftiu  people,  A  172. 


28 


Index. 


Wainwright,  G.  A.,  New  Kingdom  pot- 
ters' mark,  D  97. 
Walker,  Dr.  J.  H.,  Notice  of,  A  190. 
Wandering  of  spirit  seeking  others,  C  153. 
Water  derived  from  Osiris,  A  132. 

„      in  ancient  Egypt,  D  45. 
Water-lilies,  D  i. 
Weaving  account,  A  107. 

„        ancient,  A  140,  B  142. 
„        twisted  or  carton,  C  1 39. 
Weigall,  A.  E.,  A  93. 

„  on  Cleopatra,  B  41. 

Weight  of  Nekhtnebef,  B  184. 
„       Palestinian,  C  38. 
„       Phoenician,  B  184. 
Weights  represented,  B  3d. 
Weill,  Raymond,  Fresh  monuments,  B  26. 
Kings       of      Xlllth- 
XVI  Ith      dynasties, 
C  167. 
„  severely    wounded,     C 

187. 
West,  Mr.,  A  46,  93. 
Westerners  under  Ramessu  II,  C  38. 
Weston,  Miss  J.,  on  Grail,  C  86. 
Wheat  from  mummies,  A  78. 
White  lotus,  D  2,  8,  12,  17,  18,  20. 
Whittemore,  Prof.,  A  46,  103,  B  47. 
Whymper,  C,  Birds  in  Egyptian  Art,  B  i. 
Wiedemann,  A.,  Incarnation,  A  188. 
Wiesmann,  H.,  Adobe  from  Coptic  and 

Arabic,  C  80. 
Will,  Latin,  C  18. 
Willey,  Duncan,  A  45,  I03,  191,  B  144, 

191,  D  96. 
Wine  making,  A  38. 
Winlock,  Mr.,  A  46,  D  171. 

„  Theban  Necropolis,  C  82. 

Winslow,  Dr.  W.  C,  and  the  American 

branch,  C  94. 
Wire  of  1st  dynasty,  B  12. 
Wire-rope  way  in  excavations,  A  178. 
Witches  barred  from  the  dead,  A  1 19. 


Woman,  figure  on  couch,  D  jj. 
Women  coloured  pink,  B  141. 

„        position  of  educated,  D  89. 
Wooden  headrests,  A  166,  B  142. 

„         hoes,  A  166. 
Woolley,  C.  L.,  Hittite  Burial  customs. 

A  173- 
„  North  Syrian  cemetery, 

D39. 
Worship  of  king  in  Egypt,  D  170. 
Wreaths  in  Egypt,  D  13,  178. 
Writing,  development  of,  A  62. 
Wyndham,  Hon.  M.,  Catalogue  of  Lecon- 
field  collection,  D  175. 

Xerxes,  mistaken  reading  of,  A  137. 

Year   begins   with    Thoth    in    XVIIIth 

dynasty,  D  45. 
Yehudiyeh,   Jewish   steles   of    Tell   el-, 
D74. 
letters  on  tiles,  D  97. 
Ynuzebu,  priest,  D  129. 

Zaru,  supposed  Oantara,  D  84. 
Zeded,  A  64. 

Zed-khensu-au-onkh,  A  t,"],  H  25. 
'Zed-neit-auf-onkh,  B  28. 
Zeher,  D  126. 
Zesa,  B  78. 

Zeser,  tomb  of,  at  Saqqareh,  A  120. 
Zet.  meaning  of,  A  32,  39,  C  150. 
Zeus  Ammon  in  Cyrenaica,  D  112. 
Ziharpo,  coffin  and  biography,  C  165. 
Zimmer,  G.  F.,  Antiquity  of  iron,  B  190. 

„  Engineering  in  antiquity, 

A  140. 

„  Use    of    Meteoric     iron, 

D  45- 
Zinc  with  early  copper,  B  1 2,  23. 
Zodiac,  Egyptian,  C  165,  185. 
Zoweydeh,  Sheykh,  mosaic  and  tombs, 
C37- 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


i 


WMI^VNy  U;^.     JUL  X      til4& 


L'nryersify  of  Torcnto 
Library 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


